   Professor Stewart’s
   Cabinet of
   Mathematical Curiosities
...........................................
By the Same Author
Concepts of Modern Mathematics
Game, Set, and Math
Does God Play Dice?
Another Fine Math You’ve Got Me Into
Fearful Symmetry (with Martin Golubitsky)
Nature’s Numbers
From Here to Infinity
The Magical Maze
Life’s Other Secret
Flatterland
What Shape is a Snowflake?
The Annotated Flatland (with Edwin A. Abbott)
Math Hysteria
The Mayor of Uglyville’s Dilemma
Letters to a Young Mathematician
How to Cut a Cake
Why Beauty is Truth
Taming the Infinite

with Jack Cohen
The Collapse of Chaos
Figments of Reality
What Does a Martian Look Like?
Wheelers (science fiction)
Heaven (science fiction)

with Terry Pratchett and Jack Cohen
The Science of Discworld
The Science of Discworld II: The Globe
The Science of Discworld III: Darwin’s Watch
   Professor Stewart’s
   Cabinet of
   Mathematical Curiosities
...........................................

   Ian Stewart

...   There are three kinds of people
      in the world:
      those who can count,
      and those who can’t.




      A Member of the Perseus Books Group
      New York
Copyright © 2008 by Ian Stewart

Published in the United States in 2008 by Basic
Books, A Member of the Perseus Books Group
Published in Great Britain in 2008 by Profile
Books LTD

All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of
America. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any manner whatsoever without written
permission except in the case of brief quotations
embodied in critical articles and reviews. For
information, address Basic Books,
387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY
10016-8810.

Books published by Basic Books are available at
special discounts for bulk purchases in the United
States by corporations, institutions, and other
organizations. For more information, please
contact the Special Markets Department at the
Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite
200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810–
4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail
special.markets@perseusbooks.com.

Designed by Sue Lamble

A CIP catalog record for this book is available
from the Library of Congress.
ISBN: 978-0-465-01302-9
British ISBN: 978 1 84668 064 9

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Contents
...........................................

Start Here // 1
Alien Encounter // 4
Tap-an-Animal // 5
Curious Calculations // 6
Triangle of Cards // 6
Pop-up Dodecahedron // 7
Sliced Fingers // 8
Turnip for the Books // 9
The Four-Colour Theorem // 10
Shaggy Dog Story // 16
Shaggy Cat Story // 18
Rabbits in the Hat // 18
River Crossing 1 – Farm Produce // 20
More Curious Calculations // 20
Extracting the Cherry // 22
Make Me a Pentagon // 23
What is p? // 23
Legislating the Value of p // 24
If They Had Passed It . . . // 25
Empty glasses // 26
How Many— // 27
Three Quickies // 27
Knight’s Tours // 28
vi // Contents



Much Undo About Knotting // 29
White-Tailed Cats // 31
To Find Fake Coin // 32
Perpetual Calendar // 35
Mathematical Jokes 1 // 35
Deceptive Dice // 36
An Age-Old Old-Age Problem // 37
Why Does Minus Times Minus Make Plus? // 37
Heron Suit // 38
How to Unmake a Greek Cross // 39
How to Remember a Round Number // 39
The Bridges of Königsberg // 41
How to do Lots of Mathematics // 43
Euler’s Pentagonal Holiday // 44
Ouroborean Rings // 44
The Ourotorus // 45
Who Was Pythagoras? // 46
Proofs of Pythagoras // 47
A Constant Bore // 49
Fermat’s Last Theorem // 50
Pythagorean Triples // 58
Prime Factoids // 59
A Little-Known Pythagorean Curiosity // 61
Digital Century // 62
Squaring the Square // 62
Magic Squares // 64
Squares of Squares // 66
Ring a-Ring a-Ringroad // 67
Pure v. Applied // 68
Magic Hexagon // 68
Pentalpha // 69
Wallpaper Patterns // 70
How Old Was Diophantus? // 71
                                              Contents // vii



If You Thought Mathematicians Were Good at
   Arithmetic . . . // 72
The Sphinx is a Reptile // 72
Six Degrees of Separation // 73
Trisectors Beware! // 76
Langford’s Cubes // 78
Duplicating the Cube // 79
Magic Stars // 80
Curves of Constant Width // 81
Connecting Cables // 81
Coin Swap // 82
The Stolen Car // 82
Space-Filling Curves // 83
Compensating Errors // 84
The Square Wheel // 84
Why Can’t I Divide by Zero? // 85
River Crossing 2 – Marital Mistrust // 86
Wherefore Art Thou Borromeo? // 87
Percentage Play // 88
Kinds of People // 89
The Sausage Conjecture // 89
Tom Fool’s Knot // 90
New Merology // 92
Numerical Spell // 94
Spelling Mistakes // 95
Expanding Universe // 95
What is the Golden Number? // 96
What are the Fibonacci Numbers? // 98
The Plastic Number // 103
Family Occasion // 105
Don’t Let Go! // 105
Theorem: All Numbers are Interesting // 105
Theorem: All Numbers are Boring // 106
viii // Contents



The Most Likely Digit // 106
Why Call It a Witch? // 109
Möbius and His Band // 111
Golden Oldie // 113
Three More Quickies // 113
Miles of Tiles // 114
Chaos Theory // 117
Après-Le-Ski // 124
Pick’s Theorem // 125
Mathematical Prizes // 126
Why No Nobel for Maths? // 128
Is There a Perfect Cuboid? // 129
Paradox Lost // 130
When Will My MP3 Player Repeat? // 131
Six Pens // 134
Patented Primes // 135
The Poincaré Conjecture // 136
Hippopotamian Logic // 140
Langton’s Ant // 141
Pig on a Rope // 143
The Surprise Examination // 144
Antigravity Cone // 144
Mathematical Jokes 2 // 145
Why Gauss Became a Mathematician // 146
What Shape is a Crescent Moon? // 150
Famous Mathematicians // 150
What is a Mersenne Prime? // 151
The Goldbach Conjecture // 154
Turtles All the Way Down // 155
Hilbert’s Hotel // 157
Continuum Coaches // 160
A Puzzling Dissection // 161
A Really Puzzling Dissection // 163
                                                Contents // ix



Nothing Up My Sleeve . . . // 166
Nothing Down My Leg . . . // 167
Two Perpendiculars // 167
Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum? // 168
What is e, and Why? // 172
May Husband and Ay . . . // 173
Many Knees, Many Seats // 174
Euler’s Formula // 177
What Day is It? // 179
Strictly Logical // 180
Logical or Not? // 180
A Question of Breeding // 180
Fair Shares // 181
The Sixth Deadly Sin // 182
Weird Arithmetic // 182
How Deep is the Well? // 183
McMahon’s Squares // 183
What is the Square Root of Minus One? // 184
The Most Beautiful Formula // 186
Why is Euler’s Beautiful Formula True? // 186
Your Call May be Monitored for Training Purposes // 188
Archimedes, You Old Fraud! // 188
Fractals – The Geometry of Nature // 189
The Missing Symbol // 196
Where There’s a Wall, There’s a Way // 196
Constants to 50 Places // 197
Richard’s Paradox // 197
Connecting Utilities // 199
Are Hard Problems Easy? or How to Win a Million Dollars by
   Proving the Obvious // 199
Don’t Get the Goat // 202
All Triangles are Isosceles // 203
Square Year // 204
x // Contents



Gödel’s Theorems // 205
If p isn’t a Fraction, How Can You Calculate It? // 208
Infinite Wealth // 211
Let Fate Decide // 212
How Many— // 212
What Shape is a Rainbow? // 214
Alien Abduction // 214
The Riemann Hypothesis // 215
Anti-Atheism // 220
Disproof of the Riemann Hypothesis // 221
Murder in the Park // 221
The Cube of Cheese // 222
The Game of Life // 223
Two-Horse Race // 228
Drawing an Ellipse – and More? // 230
Mathematical Jokes 3 // 231
The Kepler Problem // 231
The Milk Crate Problem // 235
Equal Rights // 236
Road Network // 236
Tautoverbs // 237
Complexity Science // 239
Scrabble Oddity // 244
Dragon Curve // 244
Counterflip // 245
Spherical Sliced Bread // 246
Mathematical Theology // 246
Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 251
Start Here


...


When I was fourteen years old, I started a notebook. A math
notebook. Before you write me off as a sad case, I hasten to
add that it wasn’t a notebook of school math. It was a note-
book of every interesting thing I could find out about the
math that wasn’t taught at school. Which, I discovered, was
a lot, because I soon had to buy another notebook.
   OK, now you can write me off. But before you do, have
you spotted the messages in this sad little tale? The math
you did at school is not all of it. Better still: the math you
didn’t do at school is interesting. In fact, a lot of it is fun—es-
pecially when you don’t have to pass a test or get the sums
right.
   My notebook grew to a set of six, which I still have, and
then spilled over into a filing cabinet when I discovered
the virtues of the photocopier. Curiosities is a sample from
my cabinet, a miscellany of intriguing mathematical
games, puzzles, stories, and factoids. Most items stand by
themselves, so you can dip in at almost any point. A few
form short mini-series. I incline to the view that a miscel-
lany should be miscellaneous, and this one is.
2 // Start Here



    The games and puzzles include some old favorites, which
tend to reappear from time to time and often cause renewed
excitement when they do—the car and the goats, and the
12-ball weighing puzzle, both caused a huge stir in the me-
dia: one in the USA, the other in the UK. A lot of the material
is new, specially designed for this book. I’ve striven for vari-
ety, so there are logic puzzles, geometric puzzles, numerical
puzzles, probability puzzles, odd items of mathematical cul-
ture, things to do, and things to make.
    One of the virtues of knowing a bit of math is that you
can impress the hell out of your friends. (Be modest about
it, though, that’s my advice. You can also annoy the hell
out of your friends.) A good way to achieve this desirable
goal is to be up to speed on the latest buzzwords. So I’ve
scattered some short “essays” here and there, written in an
informal, nontechnical style. The essays explain some of
the recent breakthroughs that have featured prominently
in the media. Things like Fermat’s Last Theorem—remem-
ber the TV program? And the Four-Color Theorem, the
Poincaré Conjecture, Chaos Theory, Fractals, Complexity
Science, Penrose Patterns. Oh, and there are also some un-
solved questions, just to show that math isn’t all done.
Some are recreational, some serious—like the P = NP? prob-
lem, for which a million-dollar prize is on offer. You may
not have heard of the problem, but you need to know
about the prize.
    Shorter, snappy sections reveal interesting facts and dis-
coveries about familiar but fascinating topics: π, prime
numbers, Pythagoras’ Theorem, permutations, tilings.
Amusing anecdotes about famous mathematicians add a
historical dimension and give us all a chance to chuckle
sympathetically at their endearing foibles …
    Now, I did say you could dip in anywhere—and you can,
believe me—but to be brutally honest, it’s probably better
                                                 Start Here // 3



to start at the beginning and dip in following much the
same order as the pages. A few of the early items help with
later ones, you see. And the early ones tend to be a bit eas-
ier, while some of the later ones are, well, a bit … challeng-
ing. I’ve made sure that a lot of easy stuff is mixed in
everywhere, though, to avoid wearing your brain out too
quickly.
    What I’m trying to do is to excite your imagination by
showing you lots of amusing and intriguing pieces of
mathematics. I want you to have fun, but I’d also be over-
joyed if Curiosities encouraged you to engage with mathe-
matics, experience the thrill of discovery, and keep yourself
informed about important developments—be they from
four thousand years ago, last week—or tomorrow.
    Ian Stewart
    Coventry, January 2008
4 // Alien Encounter



Alien Encounter
The starship Indefensible was in orbit around the planet
Noncomposmentis, and Captain Quirk and Mr Crock had
beamed down to the surface.
    ‘According to the Good Galaxy Guide, there are two species of
intelligent aliens on this planet,’ said Quirk.
    ‘Correct, Captain – Veracitors and Gibberish. They all speak
Galaxic, and they can be distinguished by how they answer
questions. The Veracitors always reply truthfully, and the
Gibberish always lie.’
    ‘But physically—’
    ‘—they are indistinguishable, Captain.’
    Quirk heard a sound, and turned to find three aliens creeping
up on them. They looked identical.
    ‘Welcome to Noncomposmentis,’ said one of the aliens.
    ‘I thank you. My name is Quirk. Now, you are . . . ’ Quirk
paused. ‘No point in asking their names,’ he muttered. ‘For all we
know, they’ll be wrong.’
    ‘That is logical, Captain,’ said Crock.
    ‘Because we are poor speakers of Galaxic,’ Quirk improvised,
‘I hope you will not mind if I call you Alfy, Betty and Gemma.’ As
he spoke, he pointed to each of them in turn. Then he turned to
Crock and whispered, ‘Not that we know what sex they are,
either.’
    ‘They are all hermandrofemigynes,’ said Crock.
    ‘Whatever. Now, Alfy: to which species does Betty belong?’
    ‘Gibberish.’
    ‘Ah. Betty: do Alfy and Gemma belong to different species?’
    ‘No.’
    ‘Right . . . Talkative lot, aren’t they? Um . . . Gemma: to
which species does Betty belong?’
    ‘Veracitor.’
    Quirk nodded knowledgeably. ‘Right, that’s settled it, then!’
    ‘Settled what, Captain?’
    ‘Which species each belongs to.’
                                                Tap-an-Animal // 5



   ‘I see. And those species are—?’
   ‘Haven’t the foggiest idea, Crock. You’re the one who’s
supposed to be logical!’


...........................................
   Answer on page 252



Tap-an-Animal
This is a great mathematical party trick for children. They take
turns to choose an animal. Then they spell out its name while
you, or another child, tap successive points of the ten-pointed
star. You must start at the point labelled ‘Rhinoceros’, and move
in a clockwise direction along the lines. Miraculously, as they say
the final letter, you tap the correct animal.




                                                    Spell the name
                                                    to find the
                                                    animal.

   How does it work? Well, the third word along the star is ‘Cat’,
which has three letters, the fourth is ‘Lion’, with four, and so on.
To help conceal the trick, the animals in positions 0, 1 and 2
have 10, 11 and 12 letters. Since 10 taps takes you back to where
you started, everything works out perfectly.
   To conceal the trick, use pictures of the animals – in the


...........................................
diagram I’ve used their names for clarity.
6 // Curious Calculations



Curious Calculations
Your calculator can do tricks.

(1) Try these multiplications. What do you notice?

       161
       11611
       1116111
       111161111
       11;111611;111

Does the pattern continue if you use longer strings of 1’s?

(2) Enter the number
       142;857

(preferably into the memory) and multiply it by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and
7. What do you notice?


...........................................
   Answers on page 252



Triangle of Cards
I have 15 cards, numbered consecutively from 1 to 15. I want to
lay them out in a triangle. I’ve put numbers on the top three for
later reference:




                             Triangle of cards.

    However, I don’t want any old arrangement. I want each card
to be the difference between the two cards immediately below it,
                                       Pop-up Dodecahedron // 7



to left and right. For example, 5 is the difference between 4 and
9. (The differences are always calculated so that they are
positive.) This condition does not apply to the cards in the
bottom row, you appreciate.
    The top three cards are already in place – and correct. Can
you find how to place the remaining twelve cards?
    Mathematicians have found ‘difference triangles’ like this
with two, three or four rows of cards, bearing consecutive whole
numbers starting from 1. It has been proved that no difference
triangle can have six or more rows.


...........................................
   Answer on page 253



Pop-up Dodecahedron
The dodecahedron is a solid made from twelve pentagons, and is
one of the five regular solids (page 174).




       Three stages in making a pop-up dodecahedron.

    Cut out two identical copies of the left-hand diagram – 10 cm
across – from thickish card. Crease heavily along the joins so that
the five pentagonal flaps are nice and floppy. Place one copy on
top of the other, like the centre diagram. Lace an elastic band
alternately over and under, as in the right-hand diagram (thick
solid lines show where the band is on top) – while holding the
pieces down with your finger.
    Now let go.
    If you’ve got the right size and strength of elastic band, the
whole thing will pop up to form a three-dimensional dodeca-
hedron.
8 // Sliced Fingers




                            Popped-up
                            dodecahedron.

...........................................
Sliced Fingers
Here’s how to wrap a loop of string around somebody’s fingers –
your own or those of a ‘volunteer’ – so that when it is pulled tight
it seems to slice through the fingers. The trick is striking because
we know from experience that if the string is genuinely linked
with the fingers then it shouldn’t slip off. More precisely,
imagine that your fingers all touch a fixed surface – thereby
preventing the string from sliding off their tips. The trick is
equivalent to removing the loop from the holes created by your
fingers and the surface. If the loop were really linked through
those holes, you couldn’t remove it at all, so it has to appear to be
linked without actually being linked.
     If by mistake it is linked, it really would have to slice through
your fingers, so be careful.




                                                 How (not) to slice
                                                 your fingers off.


   Why is this a mathematical trick? The connection is
topology, a branch of mathematics that emerged over the past
150 years, and is now central to the subject. Topology is about
properties such as being knotted or linked – geometrical features
that survive fairly drastic transformations. Knots remain knotted
even if the string is bent or stretched, for instance.
                                           Turnip for the Books // 9



      Make a loop from a 1-metre length of string. Hook one end
over the little finger of the left hand, twist, loop it over the next
finger, twist in the same direction, and keep going until it passes
behind the thumb (left picture). Now bring it round in front of
the thumb, and twist it over the fingers in reverse order (right
picture). Make sure that when coming back, all the twists are in
the opposite direction to what they were the first time.
      Fold the thumb down to the palm of the hand, releasing the
string. Pull hard on the free loop hanging from the little finger
. . . and you can hear it slice through those fingers. Yet,
miraculously, no damage is done.


...........................................
      Unless you get a twist in the wrong direction somewhere.



Turnip for the Books
‘It’s been a good year for turnips,’ farmer Hogswill remarked to
his neighbour, Farmer Suticle.
     ‘Yup, that it has,’ the other replied. ‘How many did you grow?’
     ‘Well . . . I don’t exactly recall, but I do remember that when
I took the turnips to market, I sold six-sevenths of them, plus
one-seventh of a turnip, in the first hour.’
     ‘Must’ve been tricky cuttin’ ’em up.’
     ‘No, it was a whole number that I sold. I never cuts ’em.’
     ‘If’n you say so, Hogswill. Then what?’
     ‘I sold six-sevenths of what was left, plus one-seventh of a
turnip, in the second hour. Then I sold six-sevenths of what was
left, plus one-seventh of a turnip, in the third hour. And finally I
sold six-sevenths of what was left, plus one-seventh of a turnip,
in the fourth hour. Then I went home.’
     ‘Why?’
     ‘’Cos I’d sold the lot.’
     How many turnips did Hogswill take to market?


...........................................
   Answer on page 253
10 // The Four-Colour Theorem



The Four-Colour Theorem
Problems that are easy to state can sometimes be very hard to
answer. The four-colour theorem is a notorious example. It all
began in 1852 with Francis Guthrie, a graduate student at
University College, London. Guthrie wrote a letter to his younger
brother Frederick, containing what he thought would be a simple
little puzzle. He had been trying to colour a map of the English
counties, and had discovered that he could do it using four
colours, so that no two adjacent counties were the same colour.
He wondered whether this fact was special to the map of
England, or more general. ‘Can every map drawn on the plane be
coloured with four (or fewer) colours so that no two regions
having a common border have the same colour?’ he wrote.
     It took 124 years to answer him, and even now, the answer
relies on extensive computer assistance. No simple conceptual
proof of the four-colour theorem – one that can be checked step
by step by a human being in less than a lifetime – is known.




       Colouring England’s counties with four colours – one solution
       out of many.

    Frederick Guthrie couldn’t answer his brother’s question, but
he ‘knew a man who could’ – the famous mathematician
Augustus De Morgan. However, it quickly transpired that De
Morgan couldn’t, as he confessed in October of the same year in a
                                   The Four-Colour Theorem // 11



letter to his even more famous Irish colleague, Sir William Rowan
Hamilton.
    It is easy to prove that at least four colours are necessary for
some maps, because there are maps with four regions, each
adjacent to all the others. Four counties in the map of England
(shown here slightly simplified) form such an arrangement,
which proves that at least four colours are necessary in this case.
Can you find them on the map?




                                    A simple map
                                    needing four colours.



    De Morgan did make some progress: he proved that it is not
possible to find an analogous map with five regions, each
adjacent to all four of the others. However, this does not prove
the four-colour theorem. All it does is prove that the simplest
way in which it might go wrong doesn’t happen. For all we
know, there might be a very complicated map with, say, a
hundred regions, which can’t be coloured using only four
colours because of the way long chains of regions connect to
their neighbours. There’s no reason to suppose that a ‘bad’ map
has only five regions.
    The first printed reference to the problem dates from 1878,
when Arthur Cayley wrote a letter to the Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society (a society founded by De Morgan) to ask
whether anyone had solved the problem yet. They had not, but
in the following year Arthur Kempe, a barrister, published a
proof, and that seemed to be that.
    Kempe’s proof was clever. First he proved that any map
contains at least one region with five or fewer neighbours. If a
region has three neighbours, you can shrink it away, getting a
simpler map, and if the simpler map can be 4-coloured, so can
12 // The Four-Colour Theorem



the original one. You just give the region that you shrunk
whichever colour differs from those of its three neighbours.
Kempe had a more elaborate method for getting rid of a region
with four or five neighbours. Having established this key fact, the
rest of the proof was straightforward: to 4-colour a map, keep
shrinking it, region by region, until it has four regions or fewer.
Colour those regions with different colours, and then reverse the
procedure, restoring regions one by one and colouring them
according to Kempe’s rules. Easy!




                                                    If the right-
                                                    hand map can
                                                    be 4-coloured,
                                                    so can the left-
                                                    hand one.


    It looked too good to be true – and it was. In 1890 Percy
Heawood discovered that Kempe’s rules didn’t always work. If
you shrunk a region with five neighbours, and then tried to put it
back, you could run into terminal trouble. In 1891 Peter Guthrie
Tait thought he had fixed this error, but Julius Petersen found a
mistake in Tait’s method, too.
    Heawood did observe that Kempe’s method can be adapted
to prove that five colours are always sufficient for any map. But
no one could find a map that needed more than four. The gap was
tantalising, and quickly became a disgrace. When you know that
a mathematical problem has either 4 or 5 as its answer, surely
you ought to be able to decide which!
    But . . . no one could.
    The usual kind of partial progress then took place. In 1922
Philip Franklin proved that all maps with 26 or fewer regions can
be 4-coloured. This wasn’t terribly edifying in itself, but
Franklin’s method paved the way for the eventual solution by
introducing the idea of a reducible configuration. A configuration
is any connected set of regions within the map, plus some
                                    The Four-Colour Theorem // 13



information about how many regions are adjacent to those in
the configuration. Given some configuration, you can remove it
from the map to get a simpler map – one with fewer regions. The
configuration is reducible if there is a way to 4-colour the original
map, provided you can 4-colour the simpler map. In effect, there
has to be a way to ‘fill in’ colours in that configuration, once
everything else has been 4-coloured.
    A single region with only three neighbours forms a reducible
configuration, for instance. Remove it, and 4-colour what’s left –
if you can. Then put that region back, and give it a colour that
has not been used for its three neighbours. Kempe’s failed proof
does establish that a region with four neighbours forms a
reducible configuration. Where he went wrong was to claim the
same thing for a region with five neighbours.
    Franklin discovered that configurations containing several
regions can sometimes work when single regions don’t. Lots of
multi-region configurations turn out to be reducible.
    Kempe’s proof would have worked if every region with five
neighbours were reducible, and the reason why it would have
worked is instructive. Basically, Kempe thought he had proved
two things. First, every map contains a region with either three,
four or five adjacent ones. Second, each of the associated
configurations is reducible. Now these two facts together imply
that every map contains a reducible configuration. In particular,
when you remove a reducible configuration, the resulting
simpler map also contains a reducible configuration. Remove
that one, and the same thing happens. So, step by step, you can
get rid of reducible configurations until the result is so simple
that it has at most four regions. Colour those however you wish –
at most four colours will be needed. Then restore the previously
removed configuration; since this was reducible, the resulting
map can also be 4-coloured . . . and so on. Working backwards,
we eventually 4-colour the original map.
    This argument works because every map contains one of our
irreducible configurations: they form an ‘unavoidable set’.
    Kempe’s attempted proof failed because one of his config-
14 // The Four-Colour Theorem



urations, a region with five neighbours, isn’t reducible. But the
message from Franklin’s investigation is: don’t worry. Try a
bigger list, using lots of more complicated configurations. Dump
the region with five neighbours; replace it by several configura-
tions with two or three regions. Make the list as big as you need.
If you can find some unavoidable set of reducible configurations,
however big and messy, you’re done.
    In fact – and this matters in the final proof – you can get away
with a weaker notion of unavoidability, applying only to
‘minimal criminals’: hypothetical maps that require five colours,
with the nice feature that any smaller map needs only four
colours. This condition makes it easier to prove that a given set is
unavoidable. Ironically, once you prove the theorem, it turns out
that no minimal criminals exist. No matter: that’s the proof
strategy.
    In 1950 Heinrich Heesch, who had invented a clever method
for proving that many configurations are reducible, said that he
believed the four-colour theorem could be proved by finding an
unavoidable set of reducible configurations. The only difficulty
was to find one – and it wouldn’t be easy, because some rule-of-
thumb calculations suggested that such a set would have to
include about 10,000 configurations.
    By 1970 Wolfgang Haken had found some improvements to
Heesch’s method for proving configurations to be reducible, and
began to feel that a computer-assisted proof was within reach. It
should be possible to write a computer program to check that
each configuration in some proposed set is reducible. You could
write down several thousand configurations by hand, if you
really had to. Proving them unavoidable would be time-
consuming, but not necessarily out of reach. But with the
computers then available, it would have taken about a century to
deal with an unavoidable set of 10,000 configurations. Modern
computers can do the job in a few hours, but Haken had to work
with what was available, which meant that he had to improve
the theoretical methods, and cut the calculation down to a
feasible size.
                                    The Four-Colour Theorem // 15



     Working with Kenneth Appel, Haken began a ‘dialogue’ with
his computer. He would think of potential new methods for
attacking the problem; the computer would then do lots of sums
designed to tell him whether these methods were likely to
succeed. By 1975, the size of an unavoidable set was down to
only 2,000, and the two mathematicians had found much faster
tests for irreducibility. Now there was a serious prospect that a
human–machine collaboration could do the trick. In 1976 Appel
and Haken embarked on the final phase: working out a suitable
unavoidable set. They would tell the computer what set they had
in mind, and it would then test each configuration to see
whether it was reducible. If a configuration failed this test, it was
removed and replaced by one or more alternatives, and the
computer would repeat the test for irreducibility. It was a delicate
process, and there was no guarantee that it would stop – but if it
ever did, they would have found an unavoidable set of
irreducible configurations.
     In June 1976 the process stopped. The computer reported
that the current set of configurations – which at that stage
contained 1,936 of them, a figure they later reduced to 1,405 –
was unavoidable, and every single one of those 1,936 config-
urations was irreducible. The proof was complete.
     The computation took about 1,000 hours in those days, and
the test for reducibility involved 487 different rules. Today, with
faster computers, we can repeat the whole thing in about an
hour. Other mathematicians have found smaller unavoidable
sets and improved the tests for reducibility. But no one has yet
managed to cut down the unavoidable set to something so small
that an unaided human can verify that it does the job. And even
if somebody did do that, this type of proof doesn’t provide a very
satisfactory explanation of why the theorem is true. It just says
‘do a lot of sums, and the end result works’. The sums are clever,
and there are some neat ideas involved, but most mathemati-
cians would like to get a bit more insight into what’s really going
on. One possible approach is to invent some notion of
‘curvature’ for maps, and interpret reducibility as a kind of
16 // Shaggy Dog Story



‘flattening out’ process. But no one has yet found a suitable way
to do this.
     Nevertheless, we now know that the four-colour theorem is
true, answering Francis Guthrie’s innocent-looking question.
Which is an amazing achievement, even if it does depend on a
little bit of help from a computer.


...........................................
   Answer on page 254



Shaggy Dog Story
Brave Sir Lunchalot was travelling through foreign parts.
Suddenly there was a flash of lighting and a deafening crack of
thunder, and the rain started bucketing down. Fearing rust, he
headed for the nearest shelter, Duke Ethelfred’s castle. He arrived
to find the Duke’s wife, Lady Gingerbere, weeping piteously.
    Sir Lunchalot liked attractive young ladies, and for a brief
moment he noticed a distinct glint through Gingerbere’s tears.
Ethelfred was very old and frail, he observed . . . Only one thing,
he vowed, would deter him from a secret tryst with the Lady –
the one thing in all the world that he could not stand.
    Puns.
    Having greeted the Duke, Lunchalot enquired why
Gingerbere was so sad.
    ‘It is my uncle, Lord Elpus,’ she explained. ‘He died yester-
day.’
    ‘Permit me to offer my sincerest condolences,’ said
Lunchalot.
    ‘That is not why I weep so . . . so piteously, sir knight,’ replied
Gingerbere. ‘My cousins Gord, Evan and Liddell are unable to
fulfil the terms of uncle’s will.’
    ‘Why ever not?’
    ‘It seems that Lord Elpus invested the entire family fortune in
a rare breed of giant riding-dogs. He owned 17 of them.’
    Lunchalot had never heard of a riding-dog, but he did not
                                            Shaggy Dog Story // 17



wish to display his ignorance in front of such a lithesome lady.
But this fear, it appeared, could be set to rest, for she said,
‘Although I have heard much of these animals, I myself have
never set eyes on one.’
    ‘They are no fit sight for a fair lady,’ said Ethelfred firmly.
    ‘And the terms of the will—?’ Lunchalot asked, to divert the
direction of the conversation.
    ‘Ah. Lord Elpus left everything to his three sons. He decreed
that Gord should receive half the dogs, Evan should receive one-
third, and Liddell one-ninth.’
    ‘Mmm. Could be messy.’
    ‘No dog is to be subdivided, good knight.’
    Lunchalot stiffened at the phrase ‘good knight’, but decided
it had been uttered innocently and was not a pathetic attempt at
humour.
    ‘Well—’ Lunchalot began.
    ‘Pah, ’tis a puzzle as ancient as yonder hills!’ said Ethelfred
scathingly. ‘All you have to do is take one of our own riding-dogs
over to the castle. Then there are 18 of the damn’ things!’
    ‘Yes, my husband, I understand the numerology, but—’
    ‘So the first son gets half that, which is 9; the second gets one-
third, which is 6; the third son gets one-ninth, which is 2. That
makes 17 altogether, and our own dog can be ridden back here!’
    ‘Yes, my husband, but we have no one here who is manly
enough to ride such a dog.’
    Sir Lunchalot seized his opportunity. ‘Sire, I will ride your
dog!’ The look of admiration in Gingerbere’s eye showed him
how shrewd his gallant gesture had been.
    ‘Very well,’ said Ethelfred. ‘I will summon my houndsman
and he will bring the animal to the courtyard. Where we shall
meet them.’
    They waited in an archway as the rain continued to fall.
When the dog was led into the courtyard, Lunchalot’s jaw
dropped so far that it was a good job he had his helmet on. The
animal was twice the size of an elephant, with thick striped fur,
claws like broadswords, blazing red eyes the size of Lunchalot’s
18 // Shaggy Cat Story



shield, huge floppy ears dangling to the ground, and a tail like a
pig’s – only with more twists and covered in sharp spines. Rain
cascaded off its coat in waterfalls. The smell was indescribable.
    Perched improbably on its back was a saddle.
    Gingerbere seemed even more shocked than he by the sight
of this terrible monstrosity. However, Sir Lunchalot was
undaunted. Nothing could daunt his confidence. Nothing could
prevent a secret tryst with the Lady, once he returned astride the
giant hound, the will executed in full. Except . . .
    Well, as it happened, Sir Lunchalot did not ride the
monstrous dog to Lord Elpus’s castle, and for all he knows the
will has still not been executed. Instead, he leaped on his horse
and rode off angrily into the stormy darkness, mortally offended,
leaving Gingerbere to suffer the pangs of unrequited lust.
    It wasn’t Ethelfred’s dodgy arithmetic – it was what the Lady
had said to her husband in a stage whisper.
    What did she say?


...........................................
   Answer on page 254



Shaggy Cat Story
   No cat has eight tails.
   One cat has one tail.


...........................................
   Adding: one cat has nine tails.



Rabbits in the Hat
The Great Whodunni, a stage magician, placed his top hat on the
table.
    ‘In this hat are two rabbits,’ he announced. ‘Each of them is
either black or white, with equal probability. I am now going to
convince you, with the aid of my lovely assistant Grumpelina,
that I can deduce their colours without looking inside the hat!’
                                             Rabbits in the Hat // 19



   He turned to his assistant, and extracted a black rabbit from
her costume. ‘Please place this rabbit in the hat.’ She did.




       Pop him in the hat and deduce what’s already there.

     Whodunni now turned to the audience. ‘Before Grumpelina
added the third rabbit, there were four equally likely combina-
tions of rabbits.’ He wrote a list on a small blackboard: BB, BW,
WB and WW. ‘Each combination is equally likely – the
probability is 14.
     ‘But then I added a black rabbit. So the possibilities are BBB,
BWB, BBW and BWW – again, each with probability 14.
     ‘Suppose – I won’t do it, this is hypothetical – suppose I were
to pull a rabbit from the hat. What is the probability that it is
black? If the rabbits are BBB, that probability is 1. If BWB or BBW,
it is 23. If BWW, it is 13. So the overall probability of pulling out a
black rabbit is
       1     1 2 1 2 1 1
         61 þ 6 þ 6 þ 6
       4     4 3 4 3 4 3
which is exactly 23.
    ‘But – if there are three rabbits in a hat, of which exactly r are
black and the rest white, the probability of extracting a black
rabbit is r=3. Therefore r ¼ 2, so there are two black rabbits in the
hat.’ He reached into the hat and pulled out a black rabbit. ‘Since
I added this black rabbit, the original pair must have been one
black and one white!’
    The Great Whodunni bowed, to tumultuous applause. Then
20 // River Crossing 1 – Farm Produce



he pulled two rabbits from the hat – one pale lilac and the other
shocking pink.
    It seems evident that you can’t deduce the contents of a hat
without finding out what’s inside. Adding the extra rabbit and
then removing it again (was it the same black rabbit? Do we
care?) is a clever piece of misdirection. But why is the calculation
wrong?


...........................................
   Answer on page 255



River Crossing 1 – Farm Produce
Alcuin of Northumbria, aka Flaccus Albinus Alcuinus or
Ealhwine, was a scholar, a clergyman and a poet. He lived in the
eighth century and rose to be a leading figure at the court of the
emperor Charlemagne. He included this puzzle in a letter to the
emperor, as an example of ‘subtlety in Arithmetick, for your
enjoyment’. It still has mathematical significance, as I’ll
eventually explain. It goes like this.
    A farmer is taking a wolf, a goat and a basket of cabbages to
market, and he comes to a river where there is a small boat. He
can fit only one item of the three into the boat with him at any
time. He can’t leave the wolf with the goat, or the goat with the
cabbages, for reasons that should be obvious. Fortunately the
wolf detests cabbage. How does the farmer transport all three
items across the river?


...........................................
   Answer on page 256



More Curious Calculations
The next few calculator curiosities are variations on one basic
theme.

(1) Enter a three-digit number – say 471. Repeat it to get 471,471.
                                    More Curious Calculations // 21



Now divide that number by 7, divide the result by 11, and divide
the result by 13. Here we get

        471;471=7 ¼ 67;353
        67;353=11 ¼ 6;123
         6;123=13 ¼ 471

which is the number you first thought of.
     Try it with other three-digit numbers – you’ll find that
exactly the same trick works.
     Now, mathematics isn’t just about noticing curious things –
it’s also important to find out why they happen. Here we can do
that by reversing the entire calculation. The reverse of division is
multiplication, so – as you can check – the reverse procedure
starts with the three-digit result 471, and gives

          471613 ¼ 6;123
        6;123611 ¼ 67;353
        67;35367 ¼ 471;471

Not terribly helpful as it stands . . . but what this is telling us is
that
       47161361167 ¼ 471;471

So it could be a good idea to see what 1361167 is. Get your
calculator and work this out. What do you notice? Does it
explain the trick?

(2) Another thing mathematicians like to do is ‘generalise’. That
is, they try to find related ideas that work in similar ways.
Suppose we start with a four-digit number, say 4,715. What
should we multiply it by to get 47,154,715? Can we achieve that
in several stages, multiplying by a series of smaller numbers?

To get started, divide 47,154,715 by 4,715.

(3) If your calculator runs to ten digits (nowadays a lot of them
do), what would the corresponding trick be with five-digit
numbers?
22 // Extracting the Cherry



(4) If your calculator handles numbers with at least 12 digits, go
back to a three-digit number, say 471 again. This time, instead of
multiplying it by 7, 11 and 13, try multiplying it by 7, then 11,
then 13, then 101, then 9,901. What happens? Why?

(5) Think of a three-digit number, such as 128. Now multiply
repeatedly by 3, 3, 3, 7, 11, 13 and 37. (Yes, three multiplications
by 3.) The result is 127,999,872 – nothing special here. So add the
number your first thought of: 128. Now what do you get?


...........................................
   Answer on page 257



Extracting the Cherry
This puzzle is a golden oldie, with a simple but elusive answer.
    The cocktail cherry is inside the glass, which is formed from
four matches. Your task is to move at most two of the matches,
so that the cherry is then outside the glass. You can turn the glass
sideways or upside down if you wish, but the shape must remain
the same.




                     Move two matches
                     to extract the cherry.




...........................................
   Answer on page 258
                                                     What is p? // 23



Make Me a Pentagon
You have a long, thin rectangular strip of paper. Your task is to
make from it a regular pentagon (a five-sided figure with all edges
the same length and all angles the same size).


                                                         Unorthodox
                                                         geometry.




...........................................
   Answer on page 258



What is p?
The number p, which is approximately 3.141 59, is the length of
the circumference of a circle whose diameter is exactly 1. More
generally, a circle of diameter d has a circumference of pd. A
simple approximation to p is 317 or 22/7, but this is not exact. 317 is
approximately 3.14 285, which is wrong by the third decimal
place. A better approximation is 355/113, which is 3.141 592 9 to
seven places, whereas p is 3.141 592 6 to seven places.
    How do we know that p is not an exact fraction? However
much you continue to improve the approximation x=y by using
ever larger numbers, you can never get to p itself, only better and
better approximations. A number that cannot be written exactly
as a fraction is said to be irrational. The simplest proof that p is
irrational uses calculus, and it was found by Johann Lambert in
1770. Although we can’t write down an exact numerical
representation of p, we can write down various formulas that
define it precisely, and Lambert’s proof uses one of those
formulas.
    More strongly, p is transcendental – it does not satisfy any
algebraic equation that relates it to rational numbers. This was
proved by Ferdinand Lindemann in 1882, also using calculus.
24 // Legislating the Value of p



The fact that p is transcendental implies that the classical
geometric problem of ‘squaring the circle’ is impossible. This
problem asks for a Euclidean construction of a square whose area
is equal to that of a given circle (which turns out to be equivalent
to constructing a line whose length is the circumference of the
circle). A construction is called Euclidean if it can be performed
using an unmarked ruler and a compass. Well, to be pedantic, a
‘pair of compasses’, which means a single instrument, much as a


...........................................
‘pair of scissors’ comes as one gadget.



Legislating the Value of p
There is a persistent myth that the State Legislature of Indiana
(some say Iowa, others Idaho) once passed a law declaring the
correct value of p to be – well, sometimes people say 3,
sometimes 3 16 . . .
    Anyway, the myth is false.
    However, something uncomfortably close nearly happened.
The actual value concerned is unclear: the document in question
seems to imply at least nine different values, all of them wrong.
The law was not passed: it was ‘indefinitely postponed’, and
apparently still is. The law concerned was House Bill 246 of the
Indiana State Legislature for 1897, and it empowered the State of
Indiana to make sole use of a ‘new mathematical truth’ at no
cost. This Bill was passed – there was no reason to do otherwise,
since it did not oblige the State to do anything. In fact, the vote
was unanimous.
    The new truth, however, was a rather complicated, and
incorrect, attempt to ‘square the circle’ – that is, to construct p
geometrically. An Indianapolis newspaper published an article
pointing out that squaring the circle is impossible. By the time
the Bill went to the Senate for confirmation, the politicians –
even though most of them knew nothing about p – had sensed
that there were difficulties. (The efforts of Professor C.A. Waldo
of the Indiana Academy of Science, a mathematician who
                                     If They Had Passed It . . . // 25



happened to be visiting the House when the Bill was debated,
probably helped concentrate their minds.) They did not debate
the validity of the mathematics; they decided that the matter
was not suitable for legislation. So they postponed the bill . . .
and as I write, 111 years later, it remains that way.
    The mathematics involved was almost certainly the brain-
child of Edwin J. Goodwin, a doctor who dabbled in mathe-
matics. He lived in the village of Solitude in Posey County,
Indiana, and at various times claimed to have trisected the angle
and duplicated the cube – two other famous and equally
impossible feats – as well as squaring the circle. At any rate, the
legislature of Indiana did not consciously attempt to give p an
incorrect value by law – although there is a persuasive argument
that passing the Bill would have ‘enacted’ Goodwin’s approach,
implying its accuracy in law, though perhaps not in mathe-


...........................................
matics. It’s a delicate legal point.



If They Had Passed It . . .
If the Indiana State Legislature had passed Bill 246, and if the
worst-case scenario had proved legally valid, namely that the
value of p in law was different from its mathematical value, the
consequences would have been distinctly interesting. Suppose
that the legal value is p 6¼ p, but the legislation states that p ¼ p.
Then
       pp
           ¼ 1 mathematically
       pp

but
       pp
           ¼ 0 legally
       pp

Since mathematical truths are legally valid, the law would then
be maintaining that 1 ¼ 0. Therefore all murderers have a cast-
iron defence: admit to one murder, then argue that legally it is
zero murders. And that’s not the last of it. Multiply by one
26 // Empty Glasses



billion, to deduce that one billion equals zero. Now any citizen
apprehended in possession of no drugs is in possession of drugs
to a street value of $1 billion.
    In fact, any statement whatsoever would become legally
provable.
    It seems likely that the Law would not be quite logical enough
for this kind of argument to stand up in court. But sillier legal
arguments, often based on abuse of statistics, have done just
that, causing innocent people to be locked away for long periods.


...........................................
So Indiana’s legislators might have opened up Pandora’s box.



Empty Glasses
I have five glasses in a row. The first three are full and the other
two empty. How can I arrange them so that they are alternately
full and empty, by moving only one glass?




                                                    Start like this
                                                    ...



                                                    ... and end up
                                                    like this,
                                                    moving only
                                                    one glass.


...........................................
   Answer on page 258
                                             Three Quickies // 27



How Many—
Ways are there to rearrange the letters of the (English) alphabet?
       403;291;461;126;605;635;584;000;000

Ways are there to shuffle a pack of cards?

       80;658;175;170;943;878;571;660;636;856;403;766;975;
       289;505;440;883;277;824;000;000;000;000

Different positions are there for a Rubik cube?
       43;252;003;274;489;856;000

Different sudoku puzzles are there?
       6;670;903;752;021;072;936;960

(Calculated by Bertram Felgenhauer and Frazer Jarvis in 2005.)

Different sequences of 100 zeros and ones are there?



...........................................
       1;267;650;600;228;229;401;496;703;205;376




Three Quickies
(1) After four bridge hands have been dealt, which is the more
likely: that you and your partner hold all the spades, or that you
and your partner hold no spades?

(2) If you took three bananas from a dish holding thirteen
bananas, how many bananas would you have?

(3) A secretary prints out six letters from the computer and
addresses six envelopes to their intended recipients. Her boss, in
a hurry, interferes and stuffs the letters into the envelopes at
random, one letter in each envelope. What is the probability that
exactly five letters are in the right envelope?


...........................................
   Answers on page 258
28 // Knight’s Tours



Knight’s Tours
The knight in chess has an unusual move. It can jump two
squares horizontally or vertically, followed by a single square at
right angles, and it hops over any intermediate pieces. The
geometry of the knight’s move has given rise to many
mathematical recreations, of which the simplest is the knight’s
tour. The knight is required to make a series of moves, visiting
each square on a chessboard (or any other grid of squares) exactly
once. The diagram shows a tour on a 565 board, and also shows
what the possible moves look like. This tour is not ‘closed’– that
is, the start and finish squares are not one knight’s move apart.
Can you find a closed tour on the 565 board?




                                                         (Left) A 565
                                                         knight’s tour,
                                                         and (right) a
                                                         partial 464
                                                         knight’s tour.


    I tried to find a 464 knight’s tour, but I got stuck after visiting
13 squares. Can you find a knight’s tour that visits all 16 squares?
If not, what is the largest number of squares that the knight can
visit?
    There is a vast literature on this topic. Good websites include:
www.ktn.freeuk.com
mathworld.wolfram.com/KnightsTour.html


...........................................
   Answers on page 259
                                 Much Undo About Knotting // 29



Much Undo About Knotting
A mathematician’s knot is like an ordinary knot in a piece of
string, but the ends of the string are glued together so that the
knot can’t escape. More precisely, a knot is a closed loop in space.
The simplest such loop is a circle, which is called the unknot. The
next simplest is the trefoil knot.




                                                 Unknot and trefoil.



    Mathematicians consider two knots to be ‘the same’ – the
jargon is topologically equivalent – if one can be continuously
transformed into the other. ‘Continuously’ means you have to
keep the string in one piece – no cutting – and it can’t pass
through itself. Knot theory becomes interesting when you
discover that a really complicated knot, such as Haken’s Gordian
knot, is in fact just the unknot in disguise.




                                                       Haken’s
                                                       Gordian
                                                       knot.


   The trefoil knot is genuine – it can’t be unknotted. The first
proof of this apparently obvious fact was found in the 1920s.
30 // Much Undo About Knotting



    Knots can be listed according to their complexity, which is
measured by the crossing number – the number of apparent
crossings that occur in a picture of the knot when you draw it
using as few crossings as possible. The crossing number of the
trefoil knot is 3.
    The number of topologically distinct knots with a given
number of crossings grows rapidly. Up to 16 crossings, the
numbers are:

No. of crossings                              3             4              5              6              7             8              9              10
No. of knots                                  1             1              2              3              7             21             49             165
....................................................................................................................................................................
No. of crossings                              11            12   13    14                                    15                       16
No. of knots                                  552           2176 9,988 46,972                                253,293                  1,388,705
....................................................................................................................................................................

(For pedants: these numbers refer to prime knots, which can’t be
transformed into two separate knots tied one after the other, and
mirror images are ignored.)




                  The knots with 7 or fewer crossings.




                  The knots with 8 crossings.
                                              White-Tailed Cats // 31




       The knots with 9 crossings.
    Knot theory is used in molecular biology, to understand
knots in DNA, and in quantum physics. Just in case you thought
knots were good only for tying up parcels.
    For further information see


...........................................
katlas.math.toronto.edu/wiki/The_Rolfsen_Knot_Table



White-Tailed Cats
‘I see you’ve got a cat,’ said Ms Jones to Ms Smith. ‘I do like its
cute white tail! How many cats do you have?’
     ‘Not a lot,’ said Ms Smith. ‘Ms Brown next door has twenty,
which is a lot more than I’ve got.’
     ‘You still haven’t told me how many cats you have!’
     ‘Well . . . let me put it like this. If you chose two distinct cats
of mine at random, the probability that both of them have white
tails is exactly one-half.’
     ‘That doesn’t tell me how many you’ve got!’
     ‘Oh yes it does.’
     How many cats does Ms Smith have – and how many have
white tails?


...........................................
    Answer on page 259
32 // To Find Fake Coin



To Find Fake Coin
In February 2003 Harold Hopwood of Gravesend wrote a short
letter to the Daily Telegraph, saying that he had solved the
newspaper’s crossword every day since 1937, but one conun-
drum had been nagging away at the back of his mind since his
schooldays, and at the age of 82 he had finally decided to enlist
some help.
    The puzzle was this. You are given 12 coins. They all have the
same weight, except for one, which may be either lighter or
heavier than the rest. You have to find out which coin is
different, and whether it is light or heavy, using at most three
weighings on a pair of scales. The scales have no graduations for
weights; they just have two pans, and you can tell whether they
are in balance, or the heavier one has gone down and the lighter
one has gone up.




       Exactly one coin is either light or heavy: find out which in three
       weighings.

    Before reading on, you should have a go. It’s quite addictive.
    Within days, the paper’s letters desk had received 362 letters
and calls about the puzzle, nearly all asking for the answer, and
they phoned me. I recognised the problem as one of the classic
puzzles, typical of the ‘weights and scales’ genre, but I’d
forgotten the answer. But my friend Marty, who happened to be
in the room when I answered the phone, also recognised the
problem. The same puzzle had inspired him as a teenager, and
his successful solution had led him to become a mathematician.
    Of course he had forgotten how the solution went, but we
                                          To Find Fake Coin // 33



came up with a method in which we weighed various sets of
coins against various others, and faxed it to the newspaper.
     In fact, there are many answers, including a very clever one
which I finally remembered on the day that the Telegraph printed
our less elegant method. I had seen it twenty years earlier in New
Scientist magazine, and it had been reproduced in Thomas H.
O’Beirne’s Puzzles and Paradoxes, which I had on my bookshelf.
     Puzzles like this seem to come round every twenty years or so,
presumably when a new generation is exposed to them, a bit like
an epidemic that gets a new lease of life when the population
loses all immunity. O’Beirne traced it back to Howard Grossman
in 1945, but it is almost certainly much older, going back to the
seventeenth century. It wouldn’t surprise me if one day we find it
on a Babylonian cuneiform tablet.
     O’Beirne offered a ‘decision tree’ solution, along the lines
that Marty and I had concocted. He also recalled the elegant
1950 solution published by ‘Blanche Descartes’ in Eureka, the
journal of the Archimedeans, Cambridge University’s under-
graduate mathematics society. Ms Descartes was in actuality
Cedric A.B. Smith, and his solution is a masterpiece of ingenuity.
It is presented as a poem about a certain Professor Felix
Fiddlesticks, and the main idea goes like this:
       F set the coins out in a row
            And chalked on each a letter, so,
       To form the words ‘F AM NOT LICKED’
            (An idea in his brain had clicked.)
       And now his mother he’ll enjoin:
            MA DO LIKE
            ME TO FIND
            FAKE COIN
This cryptic list of three weighings, one set of four against
another, solves the problem, as Eureka explains, also in verse. To
convince you, I’m going to list all the outcomes of the
weighings, according to which coin is heavy or light. Here
34 // To Find Fake Coin



L means that the left pan goes down, R that the right pan goes
down, and – means they stay balanced.

                  False coin                     1st weighing                           2nd weighing                              3rd weighing
....................................................................................................................................................................
                  F heavy                        —                                      R                                         L
                  F light                        —                                      L                                         R
                  A heavy                        L                                      —                                         L
                  A light                        R                                      —                                         R
                  M heavy                        L                                      L                                         —
                  M light                        R                                      R                                         —
                  N heavy                        —                                      R                                         R
                  N light                        —                                      L                                         L
                  O heavy                        L                                      L                                         R
                  O light                        R                                      R                                         L
                  T heavy                        —                                      L                                         —
                  T light                        —                                      R                                         —
                  L heavy                        R                                      —                                         —
                  L light                        L                                      —                                         —
                  I heavy                        R                                      R                                         R
                  I light                        L                                      L                                         L
                  C heavy                        —                                      —                                         R
                  C light                        —                                      —                                         L
                  K heavy                        R                                      —                                         L
                  K light                        L                                      —                                         R
                  E heavy                        R                                      L                                         L
                  E light                        L                                      R                                         R
                  D heavy                        L                                      R                                         —
                  D light                        R                                      L                                         —
....................................................................................................................................................................

You can check that no two possibilities give the same results.
    The Telegraph’s publication of a valid solution did not end the
matter. Readers wrote in to object to our answer, on spurious
grounds. They wrote to improve it, not always by valid methods.
They e-mailed to point out Ms Descartes’s solution or similar
ones. They told us about other weighing puzzles. They thanked
us for setting their minds at rest. They cursed us for reopening an
old wound. It was as if some vast, secret reservoir of folk wisdom
had suddenly been breached. One correspondent remembered
                                        Mathematical Jokes 1 // 35



that the puzzle had featured on BBC television in the 1960s, with
the solution being given the following night. Ominously, the
letter continued, ‘I do not recall why it was raised in the first
place, or whether that was my first acquaintance with it; I have a


...........................................
feeling that it was not.’



Perpetual Calendar
In 1957 John Singleton patented a desk calendar that could
represent any date from 01 to 31 using two cubes, but he let the
patent lapse in 1965. Each cube bears six digits, one on each face.
                                                     A two-cube
                                                     calendar, and
                                                     two of the days
                                                     it can represent.

   The picture shows how such a calendar represents the 5th
and the 25th day of the month. I have intentionally omitted any
other numbers from the faces. You are allowed to place the cubes
with any of the six faces showing, and you can also put the grey
one on the left and the white one on the right.
   What are the numbers on the two cubes?


...........................................
    Answer on page 260



Mathematical Jokes 1*
A biologist, a statistician and a mathematician are sitting outside
a cafe watching the world go by. A man and a woman enter a
building across the road. Ten minutes later, they come out
accompanied by a child.
    ‘They’ve reproduced,’ says the biologist.

*   The purpose of these jokes is not primarily to make you laugh. It
    is to show you what makes mathematicians laugh, and to provide
    you with a glimpse into an obscure corner of the world’s
    mathematical subculture.
36 // Deceptive Dice



    ‘No,’ says the statistician. ‘It’s an observational error. On
average, two and a half people went each way.’
    ‘No, no, no,’ says the mathematician. ‘It’s perfectly obvious.


...........................................
If someone goes in now, the building will be empty.’



Deceptive Dice
The Terrible Twins, Innumeratus and Mathophila, were bored.
    ‘I know,’ said Mathophila brightly. ‘Let’s play dice!’
    ‘Don’t like dice.’
    ‘Ah, but these are special dice,’ said Mathophila, digging them
out of an old chocolate box. One was red, one yellow and one
blue.
    Innumeratus picked up the red dice.* ‘There’s something
funny about this one,’ he said. ‘It’s got two 3’s, two 4’s and two 8’s.’
    ‘They’re all like that,’ said Mathophila carelessly. ‘The yellow
one has two 1’s, two 5’s and two 9’s – and the blue one has two
2’s, two 6’s and two 7’s.’
    ‘They look rigged to me,’ said Innumeratus, deeply suspicious.
    ‘No, they’re perfectly fair. Each face has an equal chance of
turning up.’
    ‘How do we play, anyway?’
    ‘We each choose a different one. We roll them simulta-
neously, and the highest number wins. We can play for pocket
money.’ Innumeratus looked sceptical, so his sister quickly
added: ‘Just to be fair, I’ll let you choose first! Then you can
choose the best dice!’
    ‘Weeelll . . . ’ said Innumeratus, hesitating.
    Should he play? If not, why not?


...........................................
    Answer on page 260


*   Strictly speaking, ‘dice’ is the plural, and I should have used ‘die’ –
    but I’ve given up fighting that particular battle. I mention this to
    stop people writing in to tell me I’ve got it wrong. Anyway, the
    proverb tells us ‘never say die’.
                  Why Does Minus Times Minus Make Plus? // 37



An Age-Old Old-Age Problem
The Emperor Scrumptius was born in 35 BC, and died on his
birthday in AD 35. What was his age when he died?


...........................................
   Answer on page 262



Why Does Minus Times Minus Make Plus?
When we first meet negative numbers, we are told that multi-
plying two negative numbers together makes a positive number,
so that, for example, ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ þ6. This often seems rather
puzzling.
    The first point to appreciate is that starting from the usual
conventions for arithmetic with positive numbers, we are free to
define ð2Þ6ð3Þ to be anything we want. It could be 99, or
127p, if we wished. So the main question is not what is the true
value, but what is the sensible value. Several different lines of
thought all converge on the same result – namely, that
ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ þ6. I include the þ sign for emphasis.
    But why is this sensible? I rather like the interpretation of a
negative number as a debt. If my bank account contains £–3,
then I owe the bank £3. Suppose that my debt is multiplied by 2
(positive): then it surely becomes a debt of £6. So it makes sense
to insist that ðþ2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ 6, and most of us are happy with
that. What, though, should ð2Þ6ð3Þ be? Well, if the bank
kindly writes off (takes away) two debts of £3 each, I am £6 better
off – my account has changed exactly as it would if I had
deposited £þ6. So in banking terms, we want ð2Þ6ð3Þ to equal
þ6.
    The second argument is that we can’t have both ðþ2Þ6ð3Þ
and ð2Þ6ð3Þ equal to þ6. If that were the case, then we could
cancel the 3 and deduce that þ2 ¼ 2, which is silly.
    The third argument begins by pointing out an unstated
assumption in the second one: that the usual laws of arithmetic
should remain valid for negative numbers. It proceeds by adding
38 // Heron Suit



that this is a reasonable thing to aim for, if only for mathematical
elegance. If we require the usual laws to be valid, then
        ðþ2Þ6ð3Þ þ ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ ð2  2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ 06ð3Þ ¼ 0

so
        6 þ ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ 0

Adding 6 to both sides, we find that
        ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ þ6

In fact a similar argument justifies taking ðþ2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ 6, as
well.
    Putting all this together: mathematical elegance leads us to
define minus times minus to be plus. In applications such as
finance, this choice turns out to match reality in a straightfor-
ward manner. So as well as keeping arithmetic simple, we end up
with a good model for important aspects of the real world.
    We could do it differently. But we’d end up by complicating
arithmetic, and reducing its applicability. Basically, there’s no
contest. Even so, ‘minus times minus makes plus’ is a conscious


...........................................
human convention, not an inescapable fact of nature.



Heron Suit
        No cat that wears a heron suit is unsociable.
        No cat without a tail will play with a gorilla.
        Cats with whiskers always wear heron suits.
        No sociable cat has blunt claws.
        No cats have tails unless they have whiskers.
           Therefore:
        No cat with blunt claws will play with a gorilla.
           Is the deduction logically correct?


...........................................
     Answer on page 262
                         How to Remember a Round Number // 39



How to Unmake a Greek Cross
To paraphrase the old music-hall joke, almost any insult will
make a Greek cross. But what I want you to do is unmake a Greek
cross. In this region of Puzzledom, a Greek cross is five equal
squares joined to make a þ shape. I want you to convert it to a
square, by cutting it into pieces and reassembling them. Here’s
one solution, using five pieces. But can you find an alternative,
using four pieces, all the same shape?




                                                       Greek cross to
                                                       square in five
                                                       pieces. Now
                                                       do it with four.




...........................................
    Answer on page 263



How to Remember a Round Number
A traditional French rhyme goes like this:*
        Que j’aime a faire apprendre
        Un nombre utile aux sages!
        Glorieux Archimède, artiste ingenieux,
        Toi, de qui Syracuse loue encore le mérite!
But to which ‘number useful to the sages’ does it refer? Counting
the letters in each word, treating ‘j’ as a word with one letter and
placing a decimal point after the first digit, we get
        3:141 592 653 589 793 238 462 6


*   A loose translation is:
        How I like to make
        The sages learn a useful number!
        Glorious Archimedes, ingenious artist,
        You whose merit Syracuse still praises.
40 // How to Remember a Round Number



which is p to the first 22 decimal places. Many similar
mnemonics for p exist in many languages. In English, one of the
best known is
       How I want a drink, alcoholic of course, after the heavy
       chapters involving quantum mechanics. One is, yes,
       adequate even enough to induce some fun and pleasure
       for an instant, miserably brief.
It probably stopped there because the next digit is a 0, and it’s
not entirely clear how best to represent a word with no letters.
(For one convention, see later.) Another is:
       Sir, I bear a rhyme excelling
       In mystic force, and magic spelling
       Celestial sprites elucidate
       All my own striving can’t relate.
An ambitious p-mnemonic featured in The Mathematical
Intelligencer in 1986 (volume 8, page 56). This is an informal
‘house journal’ for professional mathematicians. The mnemonic
is a self-referential story encoding the first 402 decimals of p. It
uses punctuation marks (ignoring full stops) to represents the
digit zero, and words with more than 9 letters represent two
consecutive digits – for instance, a word with 13 letters
represents the digits 13 in that order. Oh, and any actual digit
represents itself. The story begins like this:
       For a time I stood pondering on circle sizes. The large
       computer mainframe quietly processed all of its assembly
       code. Inside my entire hope lay for figuring out an elusive
       expansion. Value: pi. Decimals expected soon. I nervously
       entered a format procedure. The mainframe processed the
       request. Error. I, again entering it, carefully retyped. This
       iteration gave zero error printouts in all – success.
For the rest of the story, and many other p-mnemonics in various
languages, see


...........................................
www.geocities.com/capecanaveral/lab/3550/pimnem.htm
                                  The Bridges of Königsberg // 41



The Bridges of Königsberg
Occasionally, a simple puzzle starts a whole new area of
mathematics. Such occurrences are rare, but I can think of at
least three. The most famous such puzzle is known as the Bridges
of Königsberg, which led Leonhard Euler* to invent a branch of
graph theory in 1735. Königsberg, which was in Prussia in those
days, straddled the river Pregel. There were two islands,
connected to the banks and each other by seven bridges. The
puzzle was: is it possible to find a path that crosses each bridge
exactly once?




                                                        Euler’s
                                                        diagram
                                                        of the
                                                        Königsberg
                                                        bridges.


    Euler solved the puzzle by proving that no solution exists.
More generally, he gave a criterion for any problem of this kind
to have a solution, and observed that it did not apply to this
particular example. He pointed out that the exact geometry is
irrelevant – what matters is how everything is connected. So the
puzzle reduces to a simple network of dots, joined by lines, here
shown superimposed on the map. Each dot corresponds to one
connected piece of land, and two dots are joined by lines if there
is a bridge linking the corresponding pieces of land.




*   It is mandatory to point out that his name is pronounced ‘oiler’,
    not ‘yooler’. Numerous oil-based puns then become equally
    mandatory, but I won’t mention any.
42 // The Bridges of Königsberg




                                                       Turning the
                                                       Königsberg
                                                       bridges into
                                                       a network.



     So we get four dots, A, B, C and D, and seven edges, a, b, c, d,
e, f and g, one for each bridge. The puzzle now simplifies to this:
is it possible to find a path through the network that includes
each line exactly once? You might like to experiment before
reading on.
     To work out when a solution exists, Euler distinguished two
kinds of path. An open tour starts and ends at different dots; a
closed tour starts and ends at the same dot. He proved that for this
particular network, neither kind of tour exists. The main
theoretical idea is the valency of each dot: how many lines meet
there. For instance, 5 lines meet at dot A, so the valency of A is 5.
     Suppose that a closed tour exists on some network. Whenever
one of the lines in the tour enters a dot, then the next line must
exit from that dot. So, if a closed tour is possible, the number of
lines at any given dot must be even: every dot must have even
valency. This already rules out any closed tour of the Königsberg
bridges, because that network has three dots of valency 3 and
one of valency 5 – all odd numbers.
     A similar criterion works for open tours, but now there must
be exactly two dots of odd valency: one at the start of the tour,
the other at its end. The Königsberg diagram has four vertices
with odd valency, so there is no open tour either.
     Euler also proved that these conditions are sufficient for a
tour to exist, provided the diagram is connected – any two dots
must be linked by some path. Euler’s proof of this is quite
                             How to do Lots of Mathematics // 43



lengthy. Nowadays a proof takes just a few lines, thanks to new


...........................................
discoveries inspired by his pioneering efforts.



How to do Lots of Mathematics
Leonhard Euler was the most prolific mathematician of all time.
He was born in 1707 in Basel, Switzerland, and died in 1783 in St
Petersburg, Russia. He wrote more than 800 research papers, and
a long list of books. Euler had 13 children, and often worked on
his mathematics while one of them sat on his knee. He lost the
sight of one eye in 1735, probably because of a cataract; the other
eye failed in 1766. Going blind seems to have had no effect on
his productivity. His family took notes, and he had an
astonishing mental powers – once doing a mental calculation to
fifty decimal places to decide which of two students had the right
answer.




                                    Leonhard Euler.



    Euler spent many years at the court of Queen Catherine the
Great. It has been suggested that to avoid becoming embroiled in
court politics – which could easily prove fatal – Euler spent
nearly all of his time working on mathematics, except when he
was asleep. That way it was obvious that he had no time for
intrigue.
    Which reminds me of a mathematical joke: Why should a
mathematician keep a mistress as well as a wife? (For gender-
equality reasons, feel free to change to ‘a lover as well as a
44 // Euler’s Pentagonal Holiday



husband’.) Answer: when the wife thinks you’re with the
mistress, and the mistress thinks you’re with the wife, you have


...........................................
time to get on with your mathematics.



Euler’s Pentagonal Holiday
Here’s your chance to put Euler’s discoveries about tours on
networks to the test. (a) Find an open tour of this network.
(b) Find one that looks the same when you reflect the figure to
interchange left and right.




                                   A network with
                                   an open tour.




...........................................
   Answer on page 263



Ouroborean Rings
Around 1960 the American mathematician Sherman K. Stein
discovered a curious pattern in the Sanskrit nonsense word
yamátárájabhánasalagám. The composer George Perle told Stein
that the stressed (á ) and unstressed (a) syllables form a
mnemonic for rhythms, and correspond to long and short
beats. Thus the first three syllables, ya má tá, have the rhythm
short, long, long. The second to fourth are má tá rá, long, long,
long – and so on. There are eight possible triplets of long or
short rhythms, and each occurs in the nonsense word exactly
once.
    Stein rewrote the word using 0 for short and 1 for long,
                                               The Ourotorus // 45



getting 0111010001. Then he noticed that the first two digits are
the same as the last two, so the string of digits can be bent into a
loop, swallowing its own tail. Now you can generate all possible
sequences of three digits 0 and 1 by moving along the loop one
space at a time:
       0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 ...
       0 1 1
         1 1 1
           1 1 0
             1 0 1
               0 1 0
                 1 0 0
                   0 0 0
                     0 0                1

I call such sequences ouroborean rings, after the mythical serpent
Ouroboros, which eats its own tail.
    There is an ouroborean ring for pairs: 0011. It is unique
except for rotations. Your task is to find one for quadruplets.
That is, arrange eight 0’s and eight 1’s in a ring so that every
possible string of four digits, from 0000 to 1111, appears as a
series of consecutive symbols. (Each string of four must then
occur exactly once.)


...........................................
   Answer on page 263



The Ourotorus
Are there higher-dimensional analogues of ouroborean rings?
    For example, there are sixteen 262 squares with entries 0 or
1. Is it possible to write 0’s and 1’s in a 464 square so that each
possibility occurs exactly once as a subsquare? You must pretend
that opposite edges of the square are joined together, so that it
wraps round into an ourotorus.
46 // Who Was Pythagoras?




                                     16 pieces for the
                                     ourotorus puzzle.


    You can turn this puzzle into a game. Cut out the sixteen
pieces shown – the small dot near the top tells you which way up
they go. Can you arrange them in a 464 grid, keeping the dot at
the top, so that adjacent squares have the same colours along
common edges? This rule also applies to squares that become
adjacent if the top and bottom, or the left and right sides, of the
grid are ‘wrapped round’ so that they join.


...........................................
   Answer on page 264



Who Was Pythagoras?
We recognise the name ‘Pythagoras’ because it is attached to a
theorem, one that most of us have grappled with at school. ‘The
square on the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle is equal to
the sum of the squares on the other two sides.’ That is, if you take
any right-angled triangle, then the square of the longest side is
equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides. Well
known as his theorem may be, the actual person has proved
rather elusive, although we know more about him as a historical
figure than we do for, say, Euclid. What we don’t know is whether
he proved his eponymous theorem, and there are good reasons
to suppose that, even if he did, he wasn’t the first to do so.
    But more of that story later.
    Pythagoras was Greek, born around 569 BC on the island of
Samos in the north-eastern Aegean. (The exact date is disputed,
but this one is wrong by at most 20 years.) His father,
                                        Proofs of Pythagoras // 47



Mnesarchus, was a merchant from Tyre; his mother, Pythais, was
from Samos. They may have met when Mnesarchus brought corn
to Samos during a famine, and was publicly thanked by being
made a citizen.
    Pythagoras studied philosophy under Pherekydes. He prob-
ably visited another philosopher, Thales of Miletus. He attended
lectures given by Anaximander, a pupil of Thales, and absorbed
many of his ideas on cosmology and geometry. He visited Egypt,
was captured by Cambyses II, the King of Persia, and taken to
Babylon as a prisoner. There he learned Babylonian mathematics
and musical theory. Later he founded the school of Pythagoreans
in the Italian city of Croton (now Crotone), and it is for this that
he is best remembered. The Pythagoreans were a mystical cult.
They believed that the universe is mathematical, and that
various symbols and numbers have a deep spiritual meaning.
    Various ancient writers attributed various mathematical
theorems to the Pythagoreans, and by extension to Pythagoras –
notably his famous theorem about right-angled triangles. But we
have no idea what mathematics Pythagoras himself originated.
We don’t know whether the Pythagoreans could prove the
theorem, or just believed it to be true. And there is evidence from
the inscribed clay tablet known as Plimpton 322 that the ancient
Babylonians may have understood the theorem 1200 years
earlier – though they probably didn’t possess a proof, because


...........................................
Babylonians didn’t go much for proofs anyway.



Proofs of Pythagoras
Euclid’s method for proving Pythagoras’s Theorem is fairly
complicated, involving a diagram known to Victorian school-
boys as ‘Pythagoras’s pants’ because it looked like underwear
hung on a washing line. This particular proof fitted into Euclid’s
development of geometry, which is why he chose it. But there
are many other proofs, some of which make the theorem much
more obvious.
48 // Proofs of Pythagoras




                                       Pythagoras’s
                                       pants.



    One of the simplest proofs is a kind of mathematician’s
jigsaw puzzle. Take any right-angled triangle, make four copies,
and assemble them inside a carefully chosen square. In one
arrangement we see the square on the hypotenuse; in the other,
we see the squares on the other two sides. Clearly, the areas
concerned are equal, since they are the difference between the
area of the surrounding square and the areas of the four copies of
the triangle.




       (Left) The square on the hypotenuse (plus four triangles). (Right)
       The sum of the squares on the other two sides (plus four
       triangles). Take away the triangles . . . and Pythagoras’s
       Theorem is proved.

    Then there’s a cunning tiling pattern. Here the slanting grid
is formed by copies of the square on the hypotenuse, and the
other grid involves both of the smaller squares. If you look at
how one slanting square overlaps the other two, you can see how
to cut the big square into pieces that can be reassembled to make
the two smaller squares.
                                          A Constant Bore // 49




                                     Proof by
                                     tiling.

    Another proof is a kind of geometric ‘movie’, showing how to
split the square on the hypotenuse into two parallelograms,
which then slide apart – without changing area – to make the
two smaller squares.




                                                   Proof by
                                                   movie.


...........................................
A Constant Bore
‘Now, this component is a solid copper sphere with a cylindrical
hole bored exactly through its centre,’ said Rusty Nail, the
construction manager. He opened a blueprint on his laptop’s
screen:
50 // Fermat’s Last Theorem




                                             Cross-section of sphere
                                             with cylindrical hole.

    ‘Looks straightforward,’ said the foreman, Lewis Bolt. ‘That’s
quite a lot of copper.’
    ‘Coincidentally, that’s what I want you to work out,’ said
Rusty. ‘What volume of copper do we need to cast it?’
    Lewis stared at the blueprint. ‘It doesn’t say how big the
sphere is.’ He paused. ‘I can’t find the answer unless you tell me
the radius of the sphere.’
    ‘Hmmm,’ said Rusty. ‘They must have forgotten to put that
in. But I’m sure you can work something out. I need the answer
by lunchtime.’
    What is the volume of copper required? Does it depend on the size
of the sphere?


...........................................
   Answer on page 264



Fermat’s Last Theorem
The great virtue of Fermat’s Last Theorem is that it’s easy to
understand what it means. What made the theorem famous is
that proving it turned out to be amazingly hard. So hard, in fact,
that it took about 350 years of effort, by many of the world’s
leading mathematicians, to polish it off. And to do that, they had
to invent entire new mathematical theories, and prove things
that looked much harder.
                                      Fermat’s Last Theorem // 51




                                         Pierre de Fermat.

    It all started around 1650, when Pierre de Fermat wrote an
enigmatic note in the margin of his copy of Diophantus’s book
Arithmetica: ‘of which fact I have found a remarkable proof, ‘but
this margin is too small to contain it.’ Proof of what? Let me back
up a bit.
    Diophantus was probably Greek, and he lived in ancient
Alexandria. Some time around AD 250 he wrote a book about
solving algebraic equations – with a slight twist: the solutions
were required to be fractions, or better still, whole numbers. Such
equations are called Diophantine equations to this day. A typical
Diophantine problem is: find two squares whose sum is square
(using only whole numbers). One possible answer is 9 and 16,
which add up to 25. Here 9 is the square of 3, while 16 is the
square of 4, and 25 is the square of 5. Another answer is 25 (the
square of 5) and 144 (the square of 12), which add up to 169 (the
square of 13). These are the tip of an iceberg.
    This particular problem is linked to Pythagoras’s Theorem,
and Diophantus was following a long tradition of looking for
Pythagorean triples – whole numbers that can form the sides of a
right-angled triangle. Diophantus wrote down a general rule for
finding all Pythagorean triples. He wasn’t the first to discover it,
but it belonged very naturally in his book. Now Fermat wasn’t a
professional mathematician – he never held an academic
position. In his day job he was a legal advisor. But his passion was
mathematics, especially what we now call number theory, the
properties of ordinary whole numbers. This area uses the
52 // Fermat’s Last Theorem



simplest ingredients anywhere in mathematics, but paradoxic-
ally it is one of the most difficult areas to make progress in. The
simpler the ingredients, the harder it is to make things with
them.
    Fermat pretty much created number theory. He took over
where Diophantus had left off, and by the time he had finished,
the subject was virtually unrecognisable. And some time around
1650 – we don’t even know the exact date – he must have been
thinking about Pythagorean triples, and wondered ‘can we do it
with cubes?’
    Just as the square of a number is what you get by multiplying
two copies of the same number, the cube is what you get by
multiplying three copies. That is, the square of 5, say, is
565 ¼ 25, and the cube of 5 is 56565 ¼ 125. These are written
more compactly as 52 and 53, respectively. No doubt Fermat tried
a few possibilities. Is the sum of the cubes of 1 and 2 a cube, for
instance? The cubes here are 1 and 8, so their sum is 9. That’s a
square, but not a cube: no banana.
    He surely noticed that you can get pretty close. The cube of 9
is 729; the cube of 10 is 1,000; their sum is 1,729. That’s very
nearly the cube of 12, which is 1,728. Missed by one! Still no
banana.
    Like any mathematician, Fermat would have tried bigger
numbers, and used any short cuts he could think of. Nothing
worked. Eventually he gave up: he hadn’t found any solutions,
and by now he suspected that there weren’t any. Except for the
cube of 0 (which is also 0) and any cube whatsoever, which add
up to the whatsoever – but we all know that adding zero makes
no difference to anything, so that’s ‘trivial’, and he wasn’t
interested in trivialities.
    OK, so cubes don’t get us anywhere. What about the next
such type of number, fourth powers? You get those by multi-
plying four copies of the same number, for example
3636363 ¼ 81 is the fourth power of 3, written as 34 . Still no
joy. In fact, for fourth powers Fermat found a logical proof that
no solutions exist except trivial ones. Very few of Fermat’s proofs
                                      Fermat’s Last Theorem // 53



have survived, and few of them were written down, but we know
how this one went, and it’s both cunning and correct. It takes
some hints from Diophantus’s method of finding Pythagorean
triples.
    Fifth powers? Sixth powers? Still nothing. By now Fermat was
ready to make a bold statement: ‘To resolve a cube into the sum
of two cubes, a fourth power into two fourth powers, or in
general any power higher than the second into two powers of the
same kind, is impossible.’ That is: the only way for two nth
powers to add up to an nth power is when n is 2 and we are
looking at Pythagorean triples. This is what he wrote in his
margin, and it’s what caused so much fuss for the next 350 years.
    We don’t actually have Fermat’s copy of the Arithmetica with
its marginal notes. What we have is a printed edition of the book
prepared later by his son, which has the notes printed in it.
    Fermat included various other unproved but fascinating bits
of number theory in his letters and the marginal notes published
by his son, and the world’s mathematicians rose to the
challenge. Soon all but one of Fermat’s statements had been
proved – apart from one that was disproved, but in that case
Fermat never claimed he had a proof anyway. The sole remaining
‘last theorem’ – not the last one he wrote down, but the last one
that no one else could prove or disprove – was the marginal note
about sums of like powers.
    Fermat’s Last Theorem became notorious. Euler proved that
there is no solution in cubes. Fermat himself had done fourth
powers. Peter Lejeune Dirichlet dealt with fifth powers in 1828,
and 14th powers in 1832. Gabriel Lamé published a proof for 7th
powers, but it had a mistake in it. Carl Friedrich Gauss, one of the
best mathematicians who has ever lived and an expert in number
theory, tried to patch up Lamé’s attempt, but failed, and gave up
on the whole problem. He wrote to a scientific friend that the
problem ‘has little interest for me, since a multitude of such
propositions, which one can neither prove nor refute, can easily
be formulated’. But for once Gauss’s instincts let him down: the
54 // Fermat’s Last Theorem



problem is interesting, and his remark seems to have been a case
of sour grapes.
    In 1874 Lamé had a new idea, linking Fermat’s Last Theorem
to a special type of complex number – involving the square root
of minus one (see page 184). There was nothing wrong with
complex numbers, but there was a hidden assumption in Lamé’s
argument, and Ernst Kummer wrote to him to inform him that it
went wrong for 23rd powers. Kummer managed to fix Lamé’s
idea, eventually proving Fermat’s Last Theorem for all powers up
to the 100th, except for 37, 59 and 67. Later mathematicians
polished off these powers too, and extended the list, until by
1980 Fermat’s Last Theorem had been proved for all powers up to
the 125,000th.
    You might think that this would be good enough, but
mathematicians are made of sterner stuff. It has to be all powers,
or nothing. The first 125,000 whole numbers are minuscule
compared with the infinity of numbers that remain. But
Kummer’s methods needed special arguments for each power,
and they weren’t really up to the job. What was needed was a new
idea. Unfortunately, nobody knew where to look for one.
    So number theorists abandoned Fermat’s Last Theorem and
headed off into areas where they could still make progress. One
such area, the theory of elliptic curves, started to get really
exciting, but also very technical. An elliptic curve is not an
ellipse – if it were, we wouldn’t need a different name for it. It is a
curve in the plane whose y-coordinate, squared, is a cubic
formula in its x-coordinate. These curves in turn are connected
with some remarkable expressions involving complex numbers,
called elliptic functions, which were in vogue in the late
nineteenth century. The theory of elliptic curves, and their
associated elliptic functions, became very deep and powerful.
                                      Fermat’s Last Theorem // 55




                                        The elliptic curve
                                        y 2 ¼ x 3  6x þ 6.




     Starting around 1970, a series of mathematicians started to
get glimpses of a strange connection between elliptic curves and
Fermat’s Last Theorem. Roughly speaking, if Fermat was wrong,
and two nth powers do add up to another nth power, then those
three numbers determine an elliptic curve. And because the
powers add like that, it is a very strange elliptic curve, with a
surprising combination of properties. So surprising, in fact, that
it looks wildly unlikely that it can exist at all, as Gerhard Frey
pointed out in 1985.
     This observation opens the way to a ‘proof by contradiction’,
what Euclid called ‘reductio ad absurdum’ (reduction to the
absurd). To prove that some statement is true, you begin by
assuming that, on the contrary, it is false. Then you deduce the
logical consequences of this falsity. If the consequences contra-
dict each other or known facts, then your assumption must have
been wrong – so the statement must be true after all. In 1986
Kenneth Ribet pinned this idea down by proving that if Fermat’s
Last Theorem is false, then the associated elliptic curve violates a
conjecture (that is, a plausible but unproved theorem) intro-
duced by the Japanese mathematicians Yutaka Taniyama and
Goro Shimura. This Taniyama–Shimura conjecture, which dates
56 // Fermat’s Last Theorem



from 1955, says that every elliptic curve is associated with a
special class of elliptic functions, called modular functions.
    Ribet’s discovery implies that any proof of the Taniyama–
Shimura conjecture automatically proves – by contradiction –
Fermat’s Last Theorem as well. Because the assumed falsity of
Fermat’s Last Theorem tells us that Frey’s elliptic curve exists, but
the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture tells us that it doesn’t.
    Unfortunately, the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture was just
that – a conjecture.
    Enter Andrew Wiles. When Wiles was a child he heard about
Fermat’s Last Theorem, and decided that when he grew up he
would become a mathematician and prove it. He did become a
mathematician, but by then he had decided that Fermat’s Last
Theorem was much as Gauss had complained – an isolated
question of no particular interest for the mainstream of
mathematics. But Frey’s discovery changed all that. It meant that
Wiles could work on the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture, an
important mainstream problem, and polish off Fermat’s Last
Theorem too.
    Now, the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture is very difficult –
that’s why it remained a conjecture for some forty years. But it
has good links to many areas of mathematics, and sits firmly in
the middle of an area where the techniques are very powerful:
elliptic curves. For seven years Wiles worked away in his study,
trying every technique he could think of, striving to prove the
Taniyama–Shimura conjecture. Hardly anybody knew that he
was working on that problem; he wanted to keep it secret.
    In June 1993 Wiles gave a series of three lectures at the Isaac
Newton Institute in Cambridge, one of the world’s top
mathematical research centres. Their title was ‘Modular forms,
elliptic curves and Galois representations’, but the experts knew
it must really be about the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture – and,
just possibly, Fermat’s Last Theorem. On day three, Wiles
announced that he had proved the Taniyama–Shimura con-
jecture, not for all elliptic curves, but for a special kind called
‘semistable’.
                                         Fermat’s Last Theorem // 57



    Frey’s elliptic curve, if it exists, is semistable. Wiles was telling
his audience that he had proved Fermat’s Last Theorem.
    But it wasn’t quite that straightforward. In mathematics you
don’t get credit for solving a big problem by giving a few lectures
in which you say you’ve got the answer. You have to publish
your ideas in full, so that everyone else can check that they are
right. And when Wiles started that process – which involves
getting experts to go over the work in detail before it gets into
print – some logical gaps emerged. He quickly filled most of
them, but one seemed much harder, and it wouldn’t go away. As
rumours spread that the proposed proof had collapsed, Wiles
made one final attempt to shore up his increasingly rickety proof
– and, contrary to most expectations, he succeeded. One final
technical point was supplied by his former student, Richard
Taylor, and by the end of October 1994 the proof was complete.
The rest, as they say, is history.
    By developing Wiles’s new methods, the Taniyama–Shimura
conjecture has now been proved for all elliptic curves, not just
semistable ones. And although the result of Fermat’s Last
Theorem is still just a minor curiosity – nothing important rests
on it being true or false – the methods used to prove it have
become a permanent and important addition to the mathemat-
ical armoury.
    One question remains. Did Fermat really have a valid proof,
as he claimed in his margin? If he did, it certainly wasn’t the one
that Wiles found, because the necessary ideas and methods
simply did not exist in Fermat’s day. As an analogy: today we
could erect the pyramids using huge cranes, but we can be
confident that however the ancient Egyptians built their
pyramids, they didn’t use modern machinery. Not just because
there is no evidence of such machines, but because the necessary
infrastructure could not have existed. If it had done, the whole
culture would have been different. So the consensus among
mathematicians is that what Fermat thought was a proof
probably had a logical gap that he missed. There are some
plausible but incorrect attempts that would have been feasible in
58 // Pythagorean Triples



his day. But we don’t know whether his proof – if one ever
existed – followed those lines. Maybe – just maybe – there is a
much simpler proof lurking out there in some unexplored realm
of mathematical imagination, waiting for somebody to stumble


...........................................
into it.* Stranger things have happened.



Pythagorean Triples
I can’t really get away without telling you Diophantus’s method
for finding all Pythagorean triples, can I?
    OK, here it is. Take any two whole numbers, and form:

. twice their product
. the difference between their squares
. the sum of their squares
Then the resulting three numbers are the sides of a Pythagorean
triangle.
    For instance, take the numbers 2 and 1. Then

. twice their product ¼ 26261 ¼ 4
. the difference between their squares ¼ 22  12 ¼ 3
. the sum of their squares ¼ 22 þ 12 ¼ 5
and we obtain the famous 3–4–5 triangle. If instead we take
numbers 3 and 2, then

. twice their product ¼ 26362 ¼ 12
. the difference between their squares ¼ 32  22 ¼ 5
. the sum of their squares ¼ 32 þ 22 ¼ 13
and we get the next-most-famous 5–12–13 triangle. Taking
numbers 42 and 23, on the other hand, leads to

. twice their product ¼ 2642623 ¼ 1;932

*   If you think you’ve found it, please don’t send it to me. I get too
    many attempted proofs as it is, and so far – well, just don’t get me
    started, OK?
                                              Prime Factoids // 59



. the difference between their squares ¼ 422  232 ¼ 1;235
. the sum of their squares ¼ 422 þ 232 ¼ 2;293
and no one has ever heard of the 1,2351,9322,293 triangle.
But these numbers do work:

       1;2352 þ 1;9322 ¼ 1;525;225 þ 3;732;624 ¼ 5;257;849
                      ¼ 2;2932

There’s a final twist to Diophantus’s rule. Having worked out the
three numbers, we can choose any other number we like and
multiply them all by that. So the 3–4–5 triangle can be converted
to a 6–8–10 triangle by multiplying all three numbers by 2, or to
a 15–20–25 triangle by multiplying all three numbers by 5. We
can’t get these two triples from the above prescription using


...........................................
whole numbers. Diophantus knew that.



Prime Factoids
Prime numbers are among the most fascinating in the whole of
mathematics. Here’s a Prime Primer.
    A whole number bigger than 1 is prime if it is not the product
of two smaller numbers. The sequence of primes begins
       2; 3; 5; 7; 11; 13; 17; 19; 23; 29; 31; 37; . . .

Note that 1 is excluded, by convention. Prime numbers are of
fundamental importance in mathematics because every whole
number is a product of primes – for instance,

       2;007 ¼ 3636223
       2;008 ¼ 262626251
       2;009 ¼ 767641

Moreover (only mathematicians worry about this sort of thing,
but actually it’s kind of important and surprisingly difficult to
prove), there is only one way to achieve this, apart from
rearranging the order of the prime numbers concerned. For
60 // Prime Factoids



instance, 2;008 ¼ 251626262, but that doesn’t count as differ-
ent. This property is called ‘unique prime factorisation’.
    If you’re worried about 1 here, mathematicians consider it to
be the product of no primes. Sorry, mathematics is like that
sometimes.
    The primes seem to be scattered fairly unpredictably. Apart
from 2, they are all odd – because an even number is divisible by
2, so it can’t be prime unless it is equal to 2. Similarly, 3 is the
only prime that is a multiple of 3, and so on.
    Euclid proved that there is no largest prime. In other words,
there exist infinitely many primes. Given any prime p, you can
always find a bigger one. In fact, any prime divisor of p! þ 1 will
do the job. Here p! ¼ p6ðp  1Þ6ðp  2Þ6    636261, a pro-
duct called the factorial of p. For instance,
       7! ¼ 7666564636261 ¼ 5;040:

The largest known prime is another matter, because Euclid’s
method isn’t a practical way to generate new primes explicitly.
As I write, the largest known prime is

       232;582;657  1

which has 9,808,358 digits when written out in decimal notation
(see page 153).
    Twin primes are pairs of primes that differ by 2. Examples are
(3, 5), (5, 7), (11, 13), (17, 19), and so on. The twin primes
conjecture states that there are infinitely many twin primes. This
is widely believed to be true, but has never been proved. Or
disproved. The largest known twin primes, to date, are:

       2;003;663;61362195;000  1 and 2;003;663;61362195;000 þ 1

with 58,711 digits each.
    Nicely does it . . . In 1994 Thomas Nicely was investigating
twin primes by computer, and noticed that his results disagreed
with previous computations. After spending weeks searching for
errors in his program, he traced the problem to a previously
unknown bug in the IntelTM PentiumTM microprocessor chip. At
                        A Little-Known Pythagorean Curiosity // 61



that time, the Pentium was the central processing unit of most of
the world’s computers. See


...........................................
www.trnicely.net/pentbug/bugmail1.html



A Little-Known Pythagorean Curiosity
It is well known that any two Pythagorean triples can be
combined to yield another one. In fact, if

       a2 þ b2 ¼ c 2

and

       A2 þ B2 ¼ C2

then

       ðaA  bBÞ2 þ ðaB þ bAÞ2 ¼ ðcCÞ2

However, there is a lesser-known feature of this method for
combining Pythagorean triples. If you think of it as a kind of
‘multiplication’ for triples, then we can define a triple to be prime
if it is not the product of two smaller triples. Then every
Pythagorean triple is a product of distinct prime Pythagorean
triples; moreover, this ‘prime factorisation’ of triples is essen-
tially unique, except for some trivial distinctions which I won’t
go into here.
     It turns out that the prime triples are those for which the
hypotenuse is a prime number of the form 4k þ 1 and the other
two sides are both non-zero, or the hypotenuse is 2 or a prime of
the form 4k  1 and one of the other sides is zero (a ‘degenerate’
triple).
     For instance, the 3–4–5 triple is prime, and so is the 5–12–13
triple, because their hypotenuses are both 4k þ 1 primes. The
0–7–7 triple is also prime. The 33–56–65 triple is not prime – it is
the ‘product’ of the 3–4–5 and 5–12–13 triples.


...........................................
     Just thought you’d like to know.
62 // Digital Century



Digital Century
Place exactly three common mathematical symbols between the
digits
       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

so that the result equals 100. The same symbol can be repeated if
you wish, but each repeat counts towards your limit of three.
Rearranging the digits is not permitted.


...........................................
   Answer on page 266



Squaring the Square
We all know that a rectangular floor can be tiled with square tiles
of equal size – provided its edges are integer (whole-number)
multiples of the size of the tile. But what happens if we are
required to use square tiles which all have different sizes?
    The first ‘squared rectangle’ was published in 1925 by
Zbigniew Morón, using ten square tiles of sizes 3, 5, 6, 11, 17, 19,
22, 23, 24 and 25.




                                                        Morón’s first
                                                        squared
                                                        rectangle.


    Not long after, he found a squared rectangle using nine
square tiles with sizes 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 15 and 18. Can you
arrange these tiles to make a rectangle? As a hint, it has size 32633.
    What about making a square out of different square tiles? For
                                          Squaring the Square // 63



a long time this was thought to be impossible, but in 1939
Roland Sprague found 55 distinct square tiles that fit together to
make a square. In 1940 four mathematicians (Leonard Brooks,
Cedric Smith, Arthur Stone and William Tutte, then under-
graduates at Trinity College, Cambridge) published a paper
relating the problem to electrical networks – the network
encodes what size the squares are, and how they fit together. This
method led to more solutions.




       Willcocks’s squared square with 24 tiles.

    In 1948 Theophilus Willcocks found 24 squares that fit
together to make a square. For a while it was thought that no
smaller set would do the job, but in 1962 Adrianus Duijvestijn
used a computer to show that only 21 square tiles are needed,
and this is the minimum number. Their sizes are 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9,
11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 24, 25, 27, 29, 33, 35, 37, 42 and 50. Can
you arrange Duijvestijn’s 21 tiles to make a square? As a hint, it has
size 1126112.
    Finally, a really hard one: can you tile the infinite plane,
64 // Magic Squares



leaving no gaps, using exactly one tile of each whole number
size: 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on? This problem remained open until
2008, when Frederick and James Henle proved that you can. See
their article ‘Squaring the plane’, American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 115 (2008), pages 3–12.
    For further information, see www.squaring.net


...........................................
   Answers on page 267



Magic Squares
I’m on a bit of a square kick here, so let me mention the most
ancient ‘square’ mathematical recreation of them all. According
to a Chinese myth, the Emperor Yu, who lived in the third
millennium BC, came across a sacred turtle in a tributary of the
Yellow River, with strange markings on its shell. These markings
are now known as the Lo shu (‘Lo river writing’).




                                           The Lo Shu.


   The markings are numbers, and they form a square pattern:
       4 9 2
       3 5 7
       8 1 6
Here every row, every column and every diagonal adds to the
same number, 15. A number square with these properties is said
to be magic, and the number concerned is its magic constant.
Usually the square is made from successive whole numbers, 1, 2,
3, 4, and so on, but sometimes this condition is relaxed.
                                                Magic Squares // 65




       Dürer’s Melancholia and its magic square.

   In 1514 the artist Albrecht Dürer produced an engraving,
‘Melancholia’, containing a 464 magic square (top right corner).
The middle numbers in the bottom row are 15–14, the date of
the work. This square contains the numbers
       16   3   2 13
       5    10 11 8
        9   6   7    12
        4   15 14     1

and has magic constant 34.
    Using consecutive whole numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . , and counting
rotations and reflections of a given square as being the same,
there are precisely:

. 1 magic square of size 363
. 880 magic squares of size 464
. 27,5305,224 magic squares of size 565
The number of 666 magic squares is unknown, but has been
estimated by statistical methods to be about 1:7761019 .
    The literature on magic squares is gigantic, including many
variations such as magic cubes. The website mathworld.wolfram.
com/MagicSquare.html is a good place to look, but there are


...........................................
plenty of others.
66 // Squares of Squares



Squares of Squares
Magic squares are so well known that I’m not going to say a lot
about the common ones, but some of the variants are more
interesting. For instance, is it possible to make a magic square
whose entries are all distinct perfect squares? Call this a square of
squares. (Clearly the condition of using consecutive whole
numbers must be ignored!)
    We still have no idea whether a 363 square of squares exists.
Near misses include Lee Sallows’s

        1272        462            52
          22       1132        942
              2          2
         74         82         972

for which all rows, columns, and one diagonal have the same
sum. Another near miss is magic:

                  3732       2892             5652
         360;721             4252              232
                  2052       5272         222;121

However, only seven entries are square – I’ve marked the
exceptions in bold. It was found by Sallows and (independently)
Andrew Bremner.
   In 1770 Euler sent the first 464 square of squares to Joseph-
Louis Lagrange:

        682       292        412        372
        172       312        792        322
        592       282        232        612
        112       772         82        492

It has magic constant, 8515.
    Christian Boyer has found 565; 666 and 767 squares of
                                                       Ring a-Ring a-Ringroad // 67



squares. The 767 square uses squares of consecutive integers
from 02 to 482:

       252   452      152   142      442      52        202
       162   102      222    62      462      262       422
       482    92      182   412      272      132       122
       342   372      312   332       02      292        42
         2        2     2        2        2        2
       19     7       35    30        1       36        402
       212   322       22   392      232      432        82



...........................................
       172   282      472    32      112      242       382




Ring a-Ring a-Ringroad
The M25 motorway completely encircles London, and in Britain
we drive on the left. So if you travel clockwise round the M25
you stay on the outside carriageway, whereas travelling anti-
clockwise keeps you on the inside carriageway, which is shorter.
But how much shorter? The total length of the M25 is 188 km
(117 miles), so the advantage of being on the inside carriageway
ought to be quite a lot – shouldn’t it?




                                                                      The M25
                                                                      motorway.
68 // Pure v. Applied



   Suppose that two cars travel right round the M25, staying in
the outside lane—no, make that two white vans travelling right
round the M25, staying in the outside lane, as they tend to do.
Assume that one is going clockwise and the other anticlockwise,
and suppose (which is not entirely true but makes the problem
specific) that the distance between these two lanes is always 10
metres. How much further does the clockwise van travel than the
anticlockwise one? You may assume that the roads all lie in a flat
plane (which also isn’t entirely true).


...........................................
   Answer on page 267



Pure v. Applied
Relations between pure and applied mathematicians are based
on trust and understanding. Pure mathematicians do not trust
applied mathematicians, and applied mathematicians do not


...........................................
understand pure mathematicians.



Magic Hexagon
Magic hexagons are like magic squares, but using a hexagon-
shaped arrangement of hexagons, like a chunk of a honeycomb:




                                      Grid for magic hexagon.


   Your task is to place the numbers from 1 to 19 in the
hexagons so that any straight line of three, four or five cells, in
                                                   Pentalpha // 69



any of the three directions, add up to the same magic constant,
which I can reveal must be 38.


...........................................
   Answer on page 269



Pentalpha
This ancient geometrical puzzle is easy if you look at it the right
way, and baffling if you don’t.




                                        Follow the rules to
                                        place nine counters.


     You have nine counters, to be placed on the circles in a five-
pointed star. Here I’ve numbered the circles to help explain the
solution. In the real game, there aren’t any numbers. Successive
counters must be positioned by placing them in an empty circle,
jumping over an adjacent circle (which may be empty or full) to
land on an empty circle adjacent to the one jumped over, so that
all three circles involved in the move are on the same straight
line. For instance, if circles 7 and 8 are empty, you can place a
counter on 7 and jump over 1 to land on 8. Here 1 can be empty
or full – it doesn’t matter. But you are not allowed to jump 7 over
1 to land on 4 or 5 because now the three circles involved are not
in a straight line.
     If you try placing counters at random, you usually run out of
suitable pairs of empty circles before finishing the puzzle.


...........................................
   Answer on page 270
70 // Wallpaper Patterns



Wallpaper Patterns
A wallpaper pattern repeats the same image in two directions:
down the wall and across the wall (or on a slant). The repetition
down the wall comes from the paper being printed in a
continuous roll, using a revolving cylinder to create the pattern.
The repetition across the wall makes it possible to continue the
pattern sideways, across adjacent strips of paper, to cover the
entire wall. A ‘drop’ from one panel to the next causes no
problems, and can actually make it easier to hang the paper.




                                       Wallpaper patterns repeat
                                       in two directions.


    The number of possible designs for wallpaper is effectively
infinite. But different designs can have the same underlying
pattern, it’s just that the basic image that gets repeated is
different. For instance, the flower in the design above could be
replaced by a butterfly, or a bird, or an abstract shape. So
mathematicians distinguish essentially different patterns by their
symmetries. What are the different ways in which we can slide
the basic image, or rotate it, or even flip it over (like reflecting it
in a mirror), so that the end result is the same as the start?
    For my pattern of flowers, the only symmetries are slides
along the two directions in which the basic image repeats, or
several such slides performed in turn. This is the simplest type of
symmetry, but there are more elaborate ones involving rotations
and reflections as well. In 1924 George Pólya and Paul Niggli
proved that there are exactly 17 different symmetry types of
wallpaper pattern – surprisingly few.
                                   How Old Was Diophantus? // 71




                                                       The 17 types
                                                       of wallpaper
                                                       pattern.

    In three dimensions the corresponding problem is to list all
possible symmetry types of atomic lattices of crystals. Here there
are 230 types. Curiously, that answer was discovered before
anyone solved the much easier two-dimensional version for


...........................................
wallpaper.



How Old Was Diophantus?
A few pages back, in the section on Fermat’s Last Theorem, I
mentioned Diophantus of Alexandria, who lived around AD 250
and wrote a famous book on equations, the Arithmetica. That is
virtually all we know about him, except that a later source tells us
his age – assuming it is authentic. That source says this:
    Diophantus’s childhood lasted one-sixth of his life. His beard
grew after one-twelfth more. He married after one-seventh more.
His son was born five years later. The son lived to half his father’s
age. Diophantus died four years after his son. How old was
Diophantus when he died?


...........................................
   Answer on page 271
72 // If You Thought Mathematicians were Good at Arithmetic . . .



If You Thought Mathematicians were Good at
Arithmetic . . .
Ernst Kummer was a German algebraist, who did some of the best
work on Fermat’s Last Theorem before the modern era. However,
he was poor at arithmetic, so he always asked his students to do
the calculations for him. On one occasion he needed to work out
967. ‘Umm . . . nine times seven is . . . nine times . . . seven . . .
is . . . ’
     ‘Sixty-one,’ suggested one student. Kummer wrote this on the
blackboard.
     ‘No, Professor! It should be sixty-seven!’ said another.
     ‘Come, come, gentlemen,’ said Kummer. ‘It can’t be both. It


...........................................
must be one or the other.’



The Sphinx is a Reptile
Well, a rep-tile, which isn’t quite the same thing. Short for
‘replicating tile’, this word refers to a shape that appears –
magnified – when several copies of it are put together. The most
obvious rep-tile is a square.




                                   Four square tiles make
                                   a bigger square.
                                     Six Degrees of Separation // 73



   However, there are many others, such as these:




       More interesting rep-tiles.

    A famous rep-tile is the sphinx. Can you assemble four copies
of a sphinx to make a bigger sphinx? You can turn some of the
tiles over if you want.




                                       The sphinx.




...........................................
   Answer on page 271



Six Degrees of Separation
In 1998 Duncan Watts and Steven Strogatz published a research
paper in the science journal Nature about ‘small-world networks’.
These are networks in which certain individuals are unusually
well-connected. The paper triggered a mass of research in which
the ideas were applied to real networks such as the Internet and
the transmission of disease epidemics.
74 // Six Degrees of Separation




                                   A small-world network. The
                                   black individual in the middle is
                                   connected to many others,
                                   unlike the grey individuals.

    The story began in 1967 when the psychologist Stanley
Milgram prepared 160 letters with the name of his stockbroker
on the envelope – but no address. Then he ‘lost’ the letters so
that random members of the populace could find them, and, he
hoped, send them on. Many of the letters duly arrived at the
stockbroker’s office, and when they did, they had done so in at
most six steps. This led Milgram to the idea that we are
connected to every other person on the planet by at most five
intermediaries – six degrees of separation.
    I was explaining the Nature paper and its background to my
friend Jack Cohen, in the maths common room. Our head of
department walked past, stopped, and said, ‘Nonsense! Jack, how
many steps are there between you and a Mongolian yak herder?’
Jack’s instant response was: ‘One!’ He then explained that the
person in the office next to his was an ecologist who had worked
in Mongolia. This kind of thing happens to Jack, because he is
one of those unusually well-connected people who makes small-
world networks hang together. For example, he causes both me
and my head of department to be only two steps away from a
Mongolian yak herder.
    You can explore the small-world phenomenon using the
Oracle of Bacon, at oracleofbacon.org. Kevin Bacon is an actor
who has appeared in a lot of movies. Anyone who has appeared
in the same movie as Kevin has a Bacon number of 1. Anyone who
has appeared in the same movie as anyone with a Bacon number
of 1 has a Bacon number of 2, and so on. If Milgram is right,
virtually every actor (movies being the relevant ‘world’) has a
                                 Six Degrees of Separation // 75



Bacon number of 6 or less. At the Oracle, when you type in an
actor’s name it tells you the Bacon number, and which movies
form the links. For instance,

. Michelle Pfeiffer appeared in Amazon Women on the Moon in
    1987 with:
. David Alan Grier, who appeared in The Woodsman in 2004
    with:
. Kevin Bacon
so Michelle’s Bacon number is 2.
    It’s not easy to find anyone with Bacon number bigger than
2! One of them is

. Hayley Mooy, who appeared in Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge
    of the Sith in 2005 with:
. Samuel L. Jackson, who appeared in Snakes on a Plane in 2006
    with:
. Rachel Blanchard, who appeared in Where the Truth Lies in
    2005 with:
. Kevin Bacon
so Hayley has Bacon number 3.
    Mathematicians have their own version of the Oracle of
Bacon, centred on the late Paul Erdős. Erdős wrote more joint
research papers than any other mathematician, so the game goes
the same way but the links are joint papers. My Erdős number is
3, because

.   I wrote a joint paper with:
.   Marty Golubitsky, who wrote a joint paper with:
.   Bruce Rothschild, who wrote a joint paper with:
.   Paul Erdős

and no shorter chain exists. One of my former students, who has
written a joint paper with me but with no one else, has Erdős
number 4.
   Usually, more people take part in the same movie than co-
author the same mathematics research paper – though I can’t say
76 // Trisectors Beware!



the same about some areas of biology or physics. So you’d expect
bigger Erdős numbers than Bacon numbers, on the whole. All
mathematicians with Erdős number 1 or 2 are listed at


...........................................
www.oakland.edu/enp



Trisectors Beware!
Euclid tells us how to bisect an angle – divide it into two equal
parts – and by repeating this method we can divide any given
angle into 4; 8; 16; . . . ; 2n equal parts. But Euclid doesn’t explain
how to trisect an angle – divide it into three equal parts. (Or
quinquisect, five equal parts, or . . . .)
    Traditionally, Euclidean constructions are carried out using
only two instruments – an idealised ruler, with no markings
along its edge, to draw a straight line, and an idealised (pair of)
compass(es), which can draw a circle. It turns out that these
instruments are inadequate for trisecting angles, but the proof
had to wait until 1837, when Pierre Wantzel used algebraic
methods to show that no ruler-and-compass trisection of the
angle 608 is possible. Undeterred, many amateurs continue to
seek trisections. So it may be worth explaining why they don’t
exist.
    Any point can be constructed approximately, and the
approximation can be as accurate as we wish. To trisect an angle
to an accuracy of, say one-trillionth of a degree is easy – in
principle. The mathematical problem is not about practical
solutions: it is about the existence, or not, of ideal, infinitely
accurate ones. It is also about finite sequences of applications of
ruler and compass: if you allow infinitely many applications,
again any point can be constructed – this time exactly.
    The key feature of Euclidean constructions is their ability to
form square roots. Repeating an operation leads to complicated
combinations of square roots of quantities involving square roots
of . . . well, you get the idea. But that’s all you can do with the
traditional instruments.
                                            Trisectors Beware! // 77



    Turning now to algebra, we find the coordinates of such
points by starting with rational numbers and repeatedly taking
square roots. Any such number satisfies an algebraic equation of
a very specific kind. The highest power of the unknown that
appears in the equation (called the degree) must be the square, or
the fourth power, or the eighth power . . . That is, the degree
must be a power of 2.
    An angle of 608 can be formedpﬃﬃ
                                         from three constructible
points: (0, 0), (1, 0), and ð12 , 23Þ, which lie on the unit circle
(radius 1, with its centre at the origin of the coordinate system).
Trisecting this angle is equivalent to constructing a point (x, y)
where the line at 208 to the horizontal axis crosses this circle.
Using trigonometry and algebra, the coordinate x of this point is
a solution of a cubic equation with rational coefficients. In fact x
satisfies the equation 8x3  6x  1 ¼ 0. But the degree of a cubic is
3, which is not a power of 2. Contradiction – so no trisection is
possible. Yes, you can get as close as you wish, but not spot on.




                                Trisecting 608 is
                                equivalent to constructing x.


    Trisectors often look for the impossible method even though
they’ve heard of Wantzel’s proof. They say things like ‘I know it’s
impossible algebraically, but what about geometrically?’ But
Wantzel’s proof shows that there is no geometric solution. It uses
algebraic methods to do that, but algebra and geometry are
mutually consistent parts of mathematics.
    I always tell would-be trisectors that if they think they’ve
found a trisection, a direct consequence is that 3 is an even
number. Do they really want to go down in history as making
that claim?
    If the conditions of the problem are relaxed, many trisections
78 // Langford’s Cubes



exist. Archimedes knew of one that used a ruler with just two
marks along its edge. The Greeks called this kind of technique a
neusis construction. It involves sliding the rule so that the marks
fall on two given curves – here a line and a circle:




                                             How Archimedes
                                             trisected an angle.


...........................................
Langford’s Cubes
The Scottish mathematician C. Dudley Langford was watching
his young son playing with six coloured blocks – two of each
colour. He noticed that the boy had arranged them so that the
two yellow blocks (say) were separated by one block, the two blue
blocks were separated by two blocks, and the two red blocks were
separated by three blocks. Here I’ve used white for yellow, grey
for blue and black for red to show you what I mean:


                                                     Langford’s
                                                     cubes.


     In between the white blocks we find just one block (which
happens to be grey). Between the grey blocks are two blocks (one
black, one white). And between the black blocks are three blocks
(two white and one grey). Langford thought about this and was
able to prove that this is the only such arrangement, except for
its left–right reversal.
     He wondered if you could do the same with more colours –
such as four. And he found that again there is only one
                                        Duplicating the Cube // 79



arrangement, plus its reversal. Can you find it? The simplest way
to work on the puzzle is to use playing cards instead of blocks.
Take two aces, two 2’s, two 3’s and two 4’s. Can you lay the cards
in a row to get exactly one card between the two aces, two cards
between the two 2’s, three cards between the two 3’s and four
cards between the two 4’s?
     There are no such arrangements with five or six pairs of cards,
but there are 26 of them with seven pairs. In general, solutions
exist if and only if the number of pairs is a multiple of 4 or one
less than a multiple of 4. No formula is known for how many
solutions there are, but in 2005 Michaël Krajecki, Christophe
Jaillet and Alain Bui ran a computer for three months and found
that there are precisely 46,845,158,056,515,936 arrangements
with 24 pairs.


...........................................
    Answer on page 271



Duplicating the Cube
I’ll briefly mention another cube problem: the third famous
‘geometric problem of antiquity’. It’s nowhere near as well
known as the other two – trisecting the angle and squaring the
circle. The traditional story is that an altar in the shape of a
perfect cube must be doubled in volume. This is equivalent to
                               pﬃﬃ
constructing a line of length 3 2 starting from the rational points
of the plane. The desired length satisfies another cubic equation,
this time the obvious one, x3  2 ¼ 0. For the same reason that
trisecting the angle is impossible, so is duplicating the cube, as
Pierre Wantzel pointed out in his 1837 paper. Cube-duplicators
are so rare that you hardly ever come across one.* Trisectors are


...........................................
ten a penny.




*   Though we shouldn’t forget Edwin J. Goodwin, whose work on
    squaring the circle nearly caused a rumpus in Indiana (page 25).
80 // Magic Stars



Magic Stars
Here is a five-pointed star. It is a magic star because the numbers
on any line of four circles add up to the same total, 24. But it’s
not a very good magic pentacle, because it doesn’t use the
numbers from 1 to 10. Instead, it uses the numbers from 1 to 12
with 7 and 11 missing.




                                     Five-pointed magic star.
                                     Numbers are not consecutive.


    It turns out that this is the best you can do with a five-
pointed star. But if you use a six-pointed star, it is possible to
place the numbers 1 to 12 in the circles, using one of each, so
that each line of four numbers has the same total. (As a hint, the
total has to be 26.) And, just to make the puzzle harder, I want
you to make the six outermost numbers add up to 26 as well.
    Where do the numbers go?




                                     Write the numbers 1 to 12 in
                                     the circles to make this star
                                     magic.




...........................................
   Answer on page 271
                                          Connecting Cables // 81



Curves of Constant Width
The circle has the same width in any orientation. If you place it
between two parallel lines, it can turn into any position. This is
one reason why wheels are circular, and it’s why circular logs
make excellent rollers.
   Is it the only curve like that?


                                       Is the circle the only
                                       curve like this?




...........................................
   Answer on page 272



Connecting Cables
Can you connect the fridge, cooker and dishwasher to the three
corresponding electrical sockets, using cables that don’t go
through the kitchen walls or any of the three appliances, so that
no two cables cross?




                                                        Connect the
                                                        appliances to
                                                        their sockets
                                                        without any
                                                        crossings.

    In ordinary three-dimensional space this puzzle is a bit
artificial, but in two dimensions it’s a genuine problem, as any
inhabitant of Flatland will tell you. A kitchen with no doors is an
even bigger problem, but there you go.


...........................................
   Answer on page 272
82 // Coin Swap



Coin Swap
The first diagram shows six silver coins, A, C, E, G, I and K,
and six gold coins, B, D, F, H, J and L. Your job is to move the
coins into the arrangement shown in the second diagram. Each
move must swap one silver coin with one adjacent gold coin;
two coins are adjacent if there is a straight line joining them.
The smallest number of moves that solves this puzzle is known
to be 17. Can you find a 17-move solution?




       Move the coins from the first position to the second.



...........................................
   Answer on page 273



The Stolen Car
Nigel Fenderbender bought a secondhand car for £900 and
advertised it in the local paper for £2,900. A respectable-looking
elderly gentleman dressed as a clergyman turned up at the
doorstep and enquired about the car, and bought it at the asking
price. However, he mistakenly made his cheque out for £3,000,
and it was the last cheque in his chequebook.
    Now, Fenderbender had no cash in the house, so he nipped
next door to the local newsagent, Maggie Zine, who was a
friend of his, and got her to change the cheque. He paid the
clergyman £100 change. However, when Maggie tried to pay
the cheque in at the bank, it bounced. In order to pay back the
newsagent, she was forced to borrow £3,000 from another
friend, Honest Harry.
    After Fenderbender had repaid this debt as well, he
complained vociferously: ‘I lost £2,000 profit on the car, £100 in
                                           Space-Filling Curves // 83



change, £3,000 repaying the newsagent and another £3,000
repaying Honest Harry. That’s £8,100 altogether!’
   How much money had he actually lost?


...........................................
   Answer on page 273



Space-Filling Curves
We ordinarily think of a curve as being much ‘thinner’ than, say,
the interior of a square. For a long time, mathematicians thought
that since a curve is one-dimensional, and a square is two-
dimensional, it must be impossible for a curve to pass through
every point inside a square.
    Not so. In 1890 the Italian mathematician Giuseppe Peano
discovered just such a space-filling curve. It was infinitely long and
infinitely wiggly, but it still fitted the mathematical concept of a
curve – which basically is some kind of bent line. In this case, very
bent. A year later the German mathematician David Hilbert
found another one. These curves are too complicated to draw –
and if you could, you might as well just draw a solid black square
like the left-hand picture. Mathematicians define space-filling
curves using a step-by-step process that introduces more and
more wiggles. At each step, the new wiggles are finer than the
previous ones. The right-hand picture shows the fifth stage of
this process for Hilbert’s curve.




       Hilbert’s space-filling curve and an approximation.
84 // Compensating Errors



    There is an excellent animation showing successive stages of
the construction of the Hilbert curve at en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Hilbert_curve. Similar curves can fill a solid cube, indeed the
analogue of a cube in any number of dimensions. So examples
like this forced mathematicians to rethink basic concepts, such
as ‘dimension’. Space-filling curves have been proposed as the


...........................................
basis of an efficient method for searching databases by computer.



Compensating Errors
The class had been given a sum to do, involving three positive
whole numbers (‘positive’ here means ‘greater than zero’).
During the break, two classmates compared notes.
    ‘Oops. I added the three numbers instead of multiplying
them,’ said George.
    ‘You’re lucky, then,’ said Henrietta. ‘It’s the same answer
either way.’
    What were the three numbers? What would they have been if
there had been only two of them, or four of them, again with
their sum equal to their product?


...........................................
   Answer on page 273



The Square Wheel
We seldom see a square wheel, but that’s not because such a
wheel can’t roll without creating a bumpy ride. Circular wheels
are great on flat roads. For square wheels, you just need a
different shape of road:


                                                    A square-
                                                    wheeled
                                                    bicycle stays
                                                    level on this
                                                    bumpy road.
                                 Why Can’t I Divide by Zero? // 85



    In fact, the correct shape is a cycloid, which is the path traced
by a point on the rim of a circular wheel as it rolls along a flat
surface. The length of each arch of the cycloid has to be the same
as the perimeter of the wheel. It turns out that almost any shape
of wheel will work provided you build the right kind of road for it
to run on. Reinventing the wheel is easy. What counts is


...........................................
reinventing the road.



Why Can’t I Divide by Zero?
In general, any number can be divided by any other number –
except when the number we are dividing by is 0. ‘Division by
zero’ is forbidden; even our calculators put up error messages if
we try it. Why is zero a pariah in the division stakes?
    The difficulty is not that we can’t define division by zero. We
could for instance, insist that any number divided by zero gives
42. What we can’t do is make that kind of definition and still
have all the usual arithmetical rules working properly. With this
admittedly very silly definition, we could start from 1=0 ¼ 42 and
apply standard arithmetical rules to deduce that 1 ¼ 4260 ¼ 0.
    Before we worry about division by zero, we have to agree on
the rules that we want division to obey. Division is normally
introduced as a kind of opposite to multiplication. What is 6
divided by 2? It is whichever number, multiplied by 2, gives 6.
Namely, 3. So the two statements
       6=2 ¼ 3   and 6 ¼ 263

are logically equivalent. And 3 is the only number that works
here, so 6/2 is unambiguous.
    Unfortunately, this approach runs into major problems when
we try to define division by zero. What is 6 divided by 0? It is
whichever number, multiplied by 0, gives 6. Namely . . . uh. Any
number multiplied by 0 makes 0; you can’t get 6.
    So 6/0 is out, then. So is any other number divided by 0,
except – perhaps – 0 itself. What about 0/0?
86 // River Crossing 2 – Marital Mistrust



    Usually, if you divide a number by itself, you get 1. So we
could define 0=0 to be 1. Now 0 ¼ 160, so the relation with
multiplication works. Nevertheless, mathematicians insist that
0/0 doesn’t make sense. What worries them is a different
arithmetical rule. Suppose that 0=0 ¼ 1. Then
       2 ¼ 261 ¼ 26ð0=0Þ ¼ ð260Þ=0 ¼ 0=0 ¼ 1

Oops.
    The main problem here is that since any number multiplied
by 0 makes 0, we deduce that 0/0 can be any number whatsoever.
If the rules of arithmetic work, and division is the opposite of
multiplication, then 0/0 can take any numerical value. It’s not
unique. Best avoided, then.
    Hang on – if you divide by zero, don’t you get infinity?
    Sometimes mathematicians use that convention, yes. But
when they do, they have to check their logic rather carefully,
because ‘infinity’ is a slippery concept. Its meaning depends on
the context, and in particular you can’t assume that it behaves
like an ordinary number.
    And even when infinity makes sense, 0/0 still causes head-


...........................................
aches.



River Crossing 2 – Marital Mistrust
Remember Alcuin’s letter to Charlemagne (page 20) and the
wolf–goat–cabbage puzzle? The same letter contained a more
complicated river-crossing puzzle, which may have been
invented by the Venerable Bede fifty or so years earlier. It came to
prominence in Claude-Gaspar Bachet’s seventeenth-century
compilation Pleasant and Delectable Problems, where it was posed
as a problem about jealous husbands who did not trust their
wives in the company of other men.
    It goes like this. Three jealous husbands with their wives must
cross a river, and find a boat with no boatman. The boat can
carry only two of them at once. How can they all cross the river
                             Wherefore Art Thou Borromeo? // 87



so that no wife is left in the company of other men without her
husband being present?
    Both men and women may row. All husbands are jealous in
the extreme: they do not trust their unaccompanied wives to be
with another man, even if the other man’s wife is also present.


...........................................
   Answer on page 273



Wherefore Art Thou Borromeo?
Three rings can be linked together in such a way that if any one of
them is ignored, the remaining two would pull apart. That is, no
two of the rings are linked, only the full set of three. This
arrangement is generally known as the Borromean rings, after the
Borromeo family in Renaissance Italy, who used it as a family
emblem. However, the arrangement is much older, and can be
found in seventh-century Viking relics. Even in Renaissance Italy,
it goes back to the Sforza family; Francesco Sforza permitted the
Borromeos to use the rings in their coat of arms as a way of
thanking them for their support during the defence of Milan.




       Emblem of the Borromeo family and its use (bottom, left of
       centre) in their coat of arms.

    On Isola Bella, one of three islands in Lake Maggiore owned
by the Borromeo family, there is a seventeenth-century baroque
88 // Percentage Play



palazzo built by Vitaliano Borromeo. Here the three-ring emblem
can be found in numerous locations, indoors and out. A careful
observer (such as a topologist) will discover that the rings
depicted there are linked in several topologically distinct ways,
only one of which has the key feature that no two rings are
linked but all three are:




       Four variations on the Borromean rings from the family palazzo.

    The first version in the picture is the canonical one; it is inset
into a floor and also appears in the garden. The second appears
on the entrance tickets and on some of the flowerpots. A family
crest at the top of the main staircase has the third pattern. Black
and white seashells on the floor of a grotto under the palazzo
form the fourth pattern. For further information, visit
www.liv.ac.uk/~spmr02/rings/
    Look at the four versions and explain why they are
topologically different.
    Can you find an analogous arrangement of four rings, such
that if any ring is removed the remaining three can be pulled
apart, but the full set of four rings cannot be disentangled?


...........................................
   Answer on page 274



Percentage Play
Alphonse bought two bicycles. He sold one to Bettany for £300,
making a loss of 25%, and one to Gemma, also for £300, making
a profit of 25%. Overall, did he break even? If not, did he make a
profit or a loss, and by how much?


...........................................
   Answer on page 275
                                      The Sausage Conjecture // 89



Kinds of People
There are 10 kinds of people in the world: those who understand


...........................................
binary numerals, and those who don’t.



The Sausage Conjecture
This is one of my favourite unsolved mathematical problems,
and it is absolutely weird, believe me.
    As a warm-up, suppose you are packing a lot of identical
circles together in the plane, and ‘shrink-wrapping’ them by
surrounding the lot with the shortest curve you can. With 7
circles, you could try a long ‘sausage’:




       Sausage shape and wrapping.

    However, suppose that you want to make the total area inside
the curve – circles and the spaces between them – as small as
possible. If each circle has radius 1, then the area of the sausage is
27.141. But there is a better arrangement of the circles, a
hexagon with a central circle, and now the area is 25.533, which
is smaller:




                                   Hexagonal shape
                                   and wrapping.


    Curiously, if you use identical spheres instead of circles, and
shrink-wrap them with the surface of smallest possible area, then
for 7 spheres the long sausage shape leads to a smaller total
90 // Tom Fool’s Knot



volume than the hexagonal arrangement. This sausage pattern
gives the smallest volume inside the wrapping for any number of
spheres up to 56. But with 57 spheres or more, the minimal
arrangements are more rotund.
    Less intuitive still is what happens in spaces of four or more
dimensions. The arrangement of 4-dimensional spheres whose
wrapping gives the smallest 4-dimensional ‘volume’ is a sausage
for any number of spheres up to 50,000. It’s not a sausage for
100,000 spheres, though. So the packing of smallest volume uses
very long thin strings of spheres until you get an awful lot of
them. Nobody knows the precise number at which 4-dimen-
sional sausages cease to be the best.
    The really fascinating change probably comes at five dimen-
sions. You might imagine that in five dimensions sausages are
best for, say, up to 50 billion spheres, but then something more
rotund gives a smaller 5-dimensional volume; and for six
dimensions the same sort of thing holds up to 29 squillion
spheres, and so on. But in 1975 Laszlo Fejes Tóth formulated the
sausage conjecture, which states that for five or more dimensions,
the arrangement of spheres that occupies the smallest volume
when shrink-wrapped is always a sausage – however large the
number of spheres may be.
    In 1998 Ulrich Betke, Martin Henk and Jörg Wills proved that
Tóth was right for any number of dimensions greater than or


...........................................
equal to 42. To date, that’s the best we know.



Tom Fool’s Knot
This trick lets you tie a decorative knot while everybody watches.
When you challenge them to do the same, they fail. No matter
how many times you demonstrate the method, they seem unable
to copy it successfully.
                                              Tom Fool’s Knot // 91




       Stages in tying the Tom Fool’s knot.

     Take a length of soft cord about two metres long and hold it
across your palms as in the first diagram, with your hands about
half a metre apart. Let the two long ends hang down to
counterbalance the weight of the length between the palms.
Now bring your hands slowly together, all the while twiddling
the fingers of the right hand. The finger twiddles have nothing at
all to do with the method of tying the knot, but they distract
spectators from the important moves, all of which happen with
the left hand. Make the movements of your right hand seem as
purposeful as you can.
     With the left hand, first slide your thumb under the cord and
pick it up, as in the second diagram. Then rapidly withdraw your
fingers and replace them behind the hanging end, as shown by
the arrow in the second diagram, to reach the position of the
third figure. Without stopping, flip your fingers under the
horizontal length of cord, as shown by the arrow in the third
diagram, and withdraw your thumb. You should now have
reached the position shown in the fourth diagram. Finally, use
the tips of the fingers of each hand to grasp the end of cord
hanging from the other hand, as in the fifth diagram. Holding on
to the cord, pull the hands apart, and the lovely symmetrical
knot of the final diagram appears.
     Practice the method until you can perform it as a single,
rhythmic movement. The knot unties if you just pull on the ends
92 // New Merology



of the cord, so you can tie it over and over again. The trick


...........................................
becomes more mysterious every time you do it.



New Merology
Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast; for it
is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred threescore and
six. Revelation of St John 13:18
     Or maybe not. The Oxyrhynchus Papyri – ancient documents
found at Oxyrhynchus in Upper Egypt – include a fragment of
the Book of Revelation from the third or fourth century which
contains the earliest known version of some sections. The
number that this papyrus assigns to the Beast is 616, not 666. So
much for barcodes being symbols of evil.* No matter, for this
puzzle is not about the Beast. It is about an idea that its inventor,
Lee Sallows, calls ‘new merology’. Let me make it clear that his
proposal is not serious, except as a mathematical problem.{
     The traditional method for assigning numbers to names,
known as gematria, sets A ¼ 1, B ¼ 2 up to Z ¼ 26. Then you add
up all the numbers corresponding to the letters in the name. But
there are lots of different systems of this kind, and lots of
alphabets. Sallows suggested a more rational method based on
words that denote numbers. For instance, with the numbering
just described, the word ONE becomes 15 þ 14 þ 5 ¼ 34. However,


*   The middle of a supermarket barcode bears lines that would
    represent the number 666, except that they have an entirely
    different function – they are ‘guard bars’ that help to correct
    errors. Each guard bar has the binary pattern 101, which on a
    barcode represents 6. Whence 666. Except that genuine barcode
    numbers actually have seven binary digits, so that 6 is 1010000,
    and . . . oh well. This led some American fundamentalists to
    denounce barcodes as the work of the Devil. Since it now seems
    that the number of the Beast is actually 616, even the numerology
    is dodgy.
{   I really shouldn’t need to say this–but given the previous footnote
    ...
                                             New Merology // 93



the number corresponding to ONE surely ought to be 1. Worse,
no English number word denotes its numerological total, a
property we will call ‘perfect’.
    Sallows wondered what happens if you assign a whole
number to each letter, so that as many as possible of the number-
words ONE, TWO, and so on are perfect. To make the problem
interesting, different letters must be given different values. So
you get a whole pile of equations like

               OþNþE¼1
           TþWþO¼2
       TþHþRþEþE¼3

in algebraic unknowns O, N, E, T, W, H, R, . . . . And you must
solve them in integers, all distinct.
    The equation O þ N þ E ¼ 1 tells us that some of the numbers
have to be negative. Suppose, for example, that E ¼ 1 and N ¼ 2.
Then the equation for ONE tells us that O ¼ 2, and similar
equations with other number-words imply that I ¼ 4; T ¼ 7 and
W ¼ 3. To make THREE perfect we must assign values to H and
R. If H ¼ 3, then R has to be 9. FOUR involves two more new
letters, F and U. If F ¼ 5, then U = 10. Now, F þ I þ V þ E ¼ 5
leads to V ¼ 5. Since SIX contains two new letters, we try
SEVEN first, which tells us that S ¼ 8. Then we can fill in X from
SIX, getting X ¼ 6. The equation for EIGHT leads to G ¼ 7.
Now all the number names from ONE to TEN are perfect.
    The only extra letter in ELEVEN and TWELVE is L.
Remarkably, L ¼ 11 makes them both perfect. But
T þ H þ I þ R þ T þ E þ E þ N ¼ 7 þ 3 þ 4 þ ð9Þ þ 7 þ 1 þ 1 þ 2,
which is 16, so we get stuck at this point.
    In fact, we always get stuck at this point: if THIRTEEN is
perfect, then
       THREE þ TEN ¼ THIRTEEN
94 // Numerical Spell



and we can remove common letters from both sides. This leads
to E ¼ I, violating the rule that different letters get different
values.
    However, we can go the other way and try to make ZERO
perfect as well as ONE to TWELVE. Using the choices above,
Z þ E þ R þ O ¼ 0 leads to Z ¼ 10, but that’s the same as U.
    Can you find a different assignment of positive or negative
whole-number values to letters, so that all words from ZERO to
TWELVE are perfect?


...........................................
   Answer on page 275



Numerical Spell
Lee Sallows also applied new merology to magic, inventing the
following trick. Select any number on the board shown below.
Spell it out, letter by letter. Add together the corresponding
numbers (subtracting those on black squares, adding those on
white squares). The result will always be plus or minus the
number you chose. For instance, TWENTY-TWO leads to
       20  25  4  2 þ 20 þ 11 þ 20  25 þ 7 ¼ 22




                                    Board for Lee Sallows’s
                                    magic trick.

...........................................
                                           Expanding Universe // 95



Spelling Mistakes
‘Thare are five mistukes im this centence.’
   True or false?


...........................................
   Answer on page 275



Expanding Universe
The starship Indefensible starts from the centre of a spherical
universe of radius 1,000 light years, and travels radially at a speed
of one light year per year – the speed of light. How long will it
take to reach the edge of the universe? Clearly, 1,000 years.
Except that I forgot to tell you that this universe is expanding.
Every year, the universe expands its radius instantly by precisely
1,000 light years. Now, how long will it take to reach the edge?
(Assume that the first such expansion happens exactly one year
after the Indefensible starts its voyage, and successive expansions
occur at intervals of exactly one year.)
    It might seem that the Indefensible never gets to the edge,
because that is receding faster than the ship can move. But at the
instant that the universe expands, the ship is carried along with
the space in which it sits, so its distance from the centre expands
proportionately. To make these conditions clear, let’s look at
what happens for the first few years.
    In the first year the ship travels 1 light year, and there are 999
light years left to traverse. Then the universe instantly expands
to a radius of 2,000 light years, and the ship moves with it. So it is
then 2 light years from the centre, and has 1,998 left to travel.
    In the next year it travels a further light year, to a distance of
3 light years, leaving 1,997. But then the universe expands to a
radius of 3,000 light-years, multiplying its radius by 1.5, so the
ship ends up 4.5 light years from the centre, and the remaining
distance increases to 2,995.5 light years.
    Does the ship ever get to the edge? If so, how long does it
take?
96 // What is the Golden Number?



   Hint: it will be useful to know that the nth harmonic number
               1 1 1          1
       Hn ¼ 1 þ þ þ þ    þ
               2 3 4          n
is approximately equal to
       log n þ g

where g is Euler’s constant, which is roughly 0.577 215 664 9.


...........................................
   Answer on page 276



What is the Golden Number?
The ancient Greek geometers discovered a useful idea which they
called ‘division in extreme and mean ratio’. By this they meant a
line AB being cut at a point P, so that the ratios AP : AB and
PB : AP are the same. Euclid used this construction in his work on
regular pentagons, and I’ll shortly explain why. But first, since
nowadays we have the luxury of replacing ratios by numbers,
let’s turn the geometric recipe into algebra. Take PB to be of
length 1, and let AP ¼ x, so that AB ¼ 1 þ x. Then the required
condition is
       1þx x
          ¼
        x   1
so that x2  x  1 ¼ 0. The solutions of this quadratic equation
are
                p
            1þ 5
       f¼          ¼ 1:618 034 . . .
               2
and
               p
            1 5
       1f¼      ¼ 0:618 034 . . .
              2
Here the symbol f is the Greek letter phi. The number f, known
as the golden number, has the pleasant property that its reciprocal
is
                  p
        1 1 þ 5
          ¼         ¼ 0:618 034 . . . ¼ f  1
        f       2
                                 What is the Golden Number? // 97



The golden number, in its geometric form as ‘division in extreme
and mean ratio’, was the starting point for the Greek geometry of
regular pentagons and anything associated with these, such as
the dodecahedron and the icosahedron. The connection is this:
if you draw a pentagon with sides equal to 1, then the long
diagonals have length f:




                                      How f appears in a
                                      regular pentagon.

     The golden ratio is often associated with aesthetics; in
particular, the ‘most beautiful’ rectangle is said to be one whose
sides are in the ratio f : 1. The actual evidence for such
statements is weak. Moreover, various methods of presenting
numerical data exaggerate the role of the golden ratio, so that it
is possible to ‘deduce’ the presence of the golden ratio in data
that bear no relation to it. Similarly, claims that famous ancient
buildings such as the Great Pyramid of Khufu or the Parthenon
were designed using the golden ratio are probably unfounded. As
with all numerology, you can find whatever you are looking for if
you try hard enough. (Thus ‘Parthenon’ has 8 letters, ‘Khufu’ has
5, and 8=5 ¼ 1:6 – very close to f.* )
     Another common fallacy is to suppose that the golden ratio
occurs in the spiral shell of a nautilus. This beautiful shell is – to
great accuracy – a type of spiral called a logarithmic spiral. Here
each successive turn bears a fixed ratio to the previous one. There
is a spiral of this kind for which this ratio equals the golden ratio.
But the ratio observed in the nautilus is not the golden ratio.

*   Well, actually ‘Parthenon’ has 9 letters, but for a moment I had
    you there. And 1.8 is a lot closer to f than many alleged instances
    of this number.
98 // What are the Fibonacci Numbers?




                                      The nautilus shell is a
                                      logarithmic spiral but its
                                      growth rate is not the
                                      golden number.

   The term ‘golden number’ is relatively modern. According to
the historian Roger Herz-Fischler, it was first used by Martin
Ohm in his book 1835 Die Reine Elementar-Mathematik (‘Pure
Elementary Mathematics’) as Goldene Schnitt (‘golden section’). It
does not go back to the ancient Greeks.
   The golden number is closely connected with the famous


...........................................
Fibonacci numbers, which come next.



What are the Fibonacci Numbers?
Many people met the Fibonacci numbers for the first time in Dan
Brown’s bestseller The Da Vinci Code. These numbers have a long
and glorious mathematical history, which has very little overlap
with anything mentioned in the book.
    It all began in 1202 when Leonardo of Pisa published the
Liber Abbaci, or ‘Book of Calculation’, an arithmetic text which
concentrated mainly on financial computations and promoted
the use of Hindu-Arabic numerals – the forerunner of today’s
familiar system, which uses just ten digits, 0 to 9, to represent all
possible numbers.
    One of the exercises in the book seems to have been
Leonardo’s own invention. It goes like this: ‘A man put a pair of
rabbits in a place surrounded on all sides by a wall. How many
pairs of rabbits are produced from that pair in a year, if it is
supposed that every month each pair produces a new pair, which
from the second month onwards becomes productive?’
                           What are the Fibonacci Numbers? // 99




                                             Family tree of of
                                             Fibonacci’s rabbits.

    Say that a pair is mature if it can produce offspring, and
immature if not.
    At the start, month 0, we have 1 mature pair.
    At month 1 this pair produces an immature pair, so we have 1
mature pair and 1 immature pair – 2 altogether.
    At month 2 the mature pair produces another immature pair;
the immature pair matures but produces nothing. So now we
have 2 mature pairs and 1 immature pair – 3 in total.
    At month 3 the 2 mature pairs produce 2 more immature
pairs; the immature pair matures but produces nothing. So now
we have 3 mature pairs and 2 immature pairs – 5 in total.
    At month 4 the 3 mature pairs produce 3 more immature
pairs; the 2 immature pairs mature but produce nothing. So now
we have 5 mature pairs and 3 immature pairs – 8 in total.
    Continuing step by step, we obtain the sequence
       1; 2; 3; 5; 8; 13; 21; 34; 55; 89; 144; 233; 377

for months 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 12. Here each term after the second is
the sum of the previous two. So the answer to Leonardo’s
question is 377.
    Some time later, probably in the eighteenth century,
Leonardo was given the nickname Fibonacci – ‘son of Bonaccio’.
This name was more catchy than Leonardo Pisano Bigollo, which
is what he used, so nowadays he is generally known as Leonardo
Fibonacci, and his sequence of numbers is known as the Fibonacci
sequence. The usual modern convention is to put the numbers 0,
1 in front, giving
       0; 1; 1; 2; 3; 5; 8; 13; 21; 34; 55; 89; 144; 233; 377
100 // What are the Fibonacci Numbers?



although sometimes the initial 0 is omitted. The symbol for the
nth Fibonacci number is Fn , starting from F0 ¼ 0.
    The Fibonacci numbers as such are pretty useless as a model
of the growth of real rabbit populations, although more general
processes of a similar kind, called Leslie models, are used to
understand the dynamics of animal and human populations.
Nevertheless, the Fibonacci numbers are important in several
areas of mathematics, and they also turn up in the natural world
– though less widely than is often suggested. Extensive claims
have been made for their occurrence in the arts, especially
architecture and painting, but here the evidence is mostly
inconclusive, except when Fibonacci numbers are used deliber-
ately – for instance, in the architect Le Corbusier’s ‘modulor’
system.
    The Fibonacci numbers have strong connections with the
golden number, which you’ll recall is
                p
             1þ 5
        f¼         ¼ 1:618 034 . . .
               2
Ratios of successive Fibonacci numbers, such as 8/5, 13/8, 21/13,
and so on become ever closer to f as the numbers get bigger. Or,
as mathematicians would say, > Fnþ1 =Fn tends to f as n tends to
infinity. For instance, 377=233 ¼ 1:618 025 . . . . In fact, for integers
of a given size, these Fibonacci fractions provide the best possible
approximations to the golden number. There is even a formula
for the nth Fibonacci number in terms of f:

               fn  ð1  fÞn
        Fn ¼        p
                      5
                                                          p
and this implies that Fn is the integer closest to fn = 5.
     If you make squares whose sides are the Fibonacci numbers
they fit together very tidily, and you can draw quarter-circles in
them to create an elegant Fibonacci spiral. Because Fn is close to
fn , this spiral is very close to a logarithmic spiral, which grows in
size by f every quarter-turn. Contrary to many claims, this spiral
                           What are the Fibonacci Numbers? // 101



is not the same shape as the Nautilus shell’s spiral. Look at the
picture on page 98 – the Nautilus is more tightly wound.




       Fibonacci spiral.

    However, there is a genuine – and striking – occurrence of
Fibonacci numbers in living creatures, namely plants. The
flowers of surprisingly many species have a Fibonacci number of
petals. Lilies have 3 petals, buttercups have 5, delphiniums have
8, marigolds have 13, asters have 21, and most daisies have 34, 55
or 89. Sunflowers often have 55, 89 or 144.
    Other numbers of petals do occur, but much less frequently.
Mostly these are twice a Fibonacci number, or a power of 2.
Sometimes numbers are from the related Lucas sequence:
       1; 3; 4; 7; 11; 18; 29; 47; 76; 123; . . .

where again each number after the second is the sum of the
previous two, but the start of the sequence is different.
   There seem to be genuine biological reasons for these
numbers to occur. The strongest evidence can be seen in the
heads of daisies and sunflowers, when the seeds have formed.
Here the seeds arrange themselves in spiral patterns:
102 // What are the Fibonacci Numbers?




                                         The head of
                                         a daisy.

     In the daisy illustrated, the eye sees one family of spirals that
twist clockwise, and a second family of spirals that twist
anticlockwise. There are 21 clockwise spirals and 34 anti-
clockwise spirals – successive Fibonacci numbers. Similar
numerical patterns, also involving successive Fibonacci numbers,
occur in pine cones and pineapples.
     The precise reasons for Fibonacci numerology in plant life are
still open to debate, though a great deal is understood. As the tip
of the plant shoot grows, long before the flowers appear, regions
of the shoot form tiny bumps, called primordia, from which the
seeds and other key parts of the flower eventually grow.
Successive primordia form at angles of 137.58 – or 222.58 if we
subtract this from 3608, measuring it the other way round. This is
a fraction f  1 of the full circle of 3608. This occurrence of the
golden ratio can be predicted mathematically if we assume that
the primordia are packed as efficiently as possible. In turn,
efficient packing is a consequence of elastic properties of the
growing shoot – the forces that affect the primordia. The genetics
of the plant is also involved. Of course, many real plants do not
quite follow the ideal mathematical pattern. Nevertheless, the
mathematics and geometry associated with the Fibonacci
sequence provide significant insights into these numerical


...........................................
features of plants.
                                         The Plastic Number // 103



The Plastic Number
The plastic number is a little-known relative of the famous
golden number. We’ve just seen how the Fibonacci numbers
create a spiralling system of squares, related to the golden
number. There is a similar spiral diagram for the plastic number,
but composed of equilateral triangles. In the diagram below, the
initial triangle is marked in black and successive triangles spiral
in a clockwise direction: the spiral shown is again roughly
logarithmic. In order to make the shapes fit, the first three
triangles all have side 1. The next two have side 2, and then the
numbers go 4, 5, 7, 9, 12, 16, 21, and so on.




       Padovan spiral.

   Again there is a simple rule for finding these numbers,
analogous to that for Fibonacci numbers: each number in the
sequence is the sum of the previous number but one, together
with the one before that. For example,
       12 ¼ 7 þ 5; 16 ¼ 9 þ 7; 21 ¼ 12 þ 9

This pattern follows from the way the triangles fit together. If Pn
is the nth Padovan number (starting from P0 ¼ P1 ¼ P2 ¼ 1),
then
       Pn ¼ Pn2 þ Pn3
104 // The Plastic Number



The first twenty numbers in the sequence are:

       1; 1; 1; 2; 2; 3; 4; 5; 7; 9; 12; 16;
       21; 28; 37; 49; 65; 86; 114; 151

I call this sequence the Padovan numbers because the architect
Richard Padovan told me about them, although he denies any
responsibility. Curiously, ‘Pádova’ is the Italian form of ‘Padua’,
and Fibonacci was from Pisa, roughly a hundred miles away. I am
tempted to rename the Fibonacci numbers ‘Pisan numbers’ to
reflect the Italian geography, but as you can see I managed to
resist.
     The plastic number, which I denote by p, is roughly 1.324718.
It is related to the Padovan numbers in the same way that the
golden number is related to the Fibonacci numbers. That is,
ratios of successive Padovan numbers, such as 49/37 or 151/114,
give good approximations to the plastic number. The pattern of
the sequence of Padovan numbers leads to the equation
p3  p  1 ¼ 0, and p is the unique real solution of this cubic
equation. The Padovan sequence increases much more slowly
than the Fibonacci sequence because p is smaller than f. There
are many interesting patterns in the Padovan sequence. For
example, the diagram shows that 21 ¼ 16 þ 5, because triangles
adjacent along a suitable edge have to fit together; similarly,
16 ¼ 12 þ 4; 12 ¼ 9 þ 3, and so on. Therefore
       Pn ¼ Pn1 þ Pn5

which is an alternative rule for deriving further terms of the
sequence. This equation implies that p5  p4  1 ¼ 0, and it is not
immediately obvious that p, defined as a solution of a cubic


...........................................
equation, must also satisfy this quintic (fifth-degree) equation.
                     Theorem: All Numbers are Interesting // 105



Family Occasion
‘It was a wonderful party,’ said Lucilla to her friend Harriet.
    ‘Who was there?’
    ‘Well – there was one grandfather, one grandmother, two
fathers, two mothers, four children, three grandchildren, one
brother, two sisters, two sons, two daughters, one father-in-law,
one mother-in-law and one daughter-in-law.’
    ‘Wow! Twenty-three people!’
    ‘No, it was less than that. A lot less.’
    What is the smallest size of party that is consistent with
Lucilla’s description?


...........................................
   Answer on page 277



Don’t Let Go!
Topology is a branch of mathematics in which two shapes are
‘the same’ if one can be continuously deformed into the other.
So you can bend, stretch, and shrink, but not cut. This ancient
topological chestnut still has many attractions – in particular,
not everyone has seen it before. What you have to do is pick up a
length of rope, with the left hand holding one end and the right
hand holding the other, and tie a knot in the rope without letting
go of the ends.


...........................................
   Answer on page 277



Theorem: All Numbers are Interesting
Proof: For a contradiction, suppose not. Then there is a smallest
uninteresting number. But being the smallest one singles it out
among all other numbers, making it special, hence interesting –


...........................................
contradiction.
106 // Theorem: All Numbers are Boring



Theorem: All Numbers are Boring
Proof: For a contradiction, suppose not. Then there is a smallest
non-boring number.


...........................................
   And your point is—?



The Most Likely Digit
If you look at a list of numerical data, and count how often a
given digit turns up as the first digit in each entry, which digit is
most likely? The obvious guess is that every digit has the same
chance of occurring as any other. But it turns out that for most
kinds of data, this is wrong.
    Here’s a typical data set – the areas of 18 islands in the
Bahamas. I’ve given the figures in square miles and in square
kilometres, for reasons I’ll shortly explain.

                  Island                                                            Area (sq mi)                                Area (sq km)
....................................................................................................................................................................
                  Abaco                                                              649                                        1681
                  Acklins                                                            192                                         497
                  Berry Islands                                                     2300                                        5957
                  Bimini Islands                                                       9                                          23
                  Cat Island                                                         150                                         388
                  Crooked and Long Cay                                                93                                         241
                  Eleuthera                                                          187                                         484
                  Exuma                                                              112                                         290
                  Grand Bahama                                                       530                                        1373
                  Harbour Island                                                       3                                           8
                  Inagua                                                             599                                        1551
                  Long island                                                        230                                         596
                  Mayaguana                                                          110                                         285
                  New Providence                                                      80                                         207
                  Ragged Island                                                       14                                          36
                  Rum Cay                                                             30                                          78
                  San Salvador                                                        63                                         163
                  Spanish Wells                                                       10                                          26
....................................................................................................................................................................
                                         The Most Likely Digit // 107



For the square mile data, the number of times that a given first
digit (shown in brackets) occurs goes like this:
       ð1Þ7 ð2Þ 2 ð3Þ 2 ð4Þ 0 ð5Þ 2 ð6Þ 2 ð7Þ 0 ð8Þ 1 ð9Þ 2

and 1 wins hands down. In square kilometres, the corresponding
numbers are
       ð1Þ 4 ð2Þ 6 ð3Þ 2 ð4Þ 2 ð5Þ 2 ð6Þ 0 ð7Þ 1 ð8Þ 1 ð9Þ 0

and now 2 wins, but only just.
    In 1938 the physicist Frank Benford observed that for long
enough lists of data, the numbers encountered by physicists and
engineers are most likely to start with the digit 1 and least likely
to start with 9. The frequency with which a given initial digit
occurs – that is, the probability that the first digit takes a given
value – decreases as the digits increase from 1 to 9. Benford
discovered empirically that the probability of encountering n as
the first decimal digit is
       log10 ðn þ 1Þ  log10 ðnÞ

where the subscript 10 means that the logarithms are to base ten.
(The value n = 0 is excluded because the initial digit is by
definition the first non-zero digit.) Benford called this formula the
law of anomalous numbers, but nowadays it’s usually known as
Benford’s law.




       Theoretical frequencies according to Benford’s law.
108 // The Most Likely Digit



   For the Bahama Island data, the frequencies look like this:




       Observed frequencies for the areas of the Bahama Islands,
       compared with Benford’s theoretical ideal.

    There are some differences between theory and reality, but
the data sets here are fairly small, so we would expect that. Even
with only 18 numbers, there is a strong prevalence of 1’s and 2’s
– which, according to Benford’s law, should between them occur
just over half the time.
    Benford’s formula is far from obvious, but a little thought
shows that the nine frequencies are unlikely to be identical.
Think of a street of houses, numbered from 1 upwards. The
probability of a given digit coming first varies considerably with
the number of houses on the street. If there are nine houses, each
digit occurs equally often. But, if there are 19, then the initial
digit is 1 for houses 1 and 10–19, a frequency of 11/19, or more
than 50%. As the length of the street increases, the frequency
with which a given first digit occurs wanders up and down in a
complicated but computable manner. The nine frequencies are
the same only when the number of houses is 9, 99, 999, and so on.
    Benford’s formula is distinguished by a beautiful property: it is
scale-invariant. If you measure the areas of Bahamian islands in
square miles or square kilometres, if you multiply house numbers
                                        Why Call It a Witch? // 109



by 7 or 93, then – provided you have a big enough sample – the
same law applies. In fact, Benford’s Law is the only scale-invariant
frequency law. It is unclear why nature prefers scale-invariant
frequencies, but it seems reasonable that the natural world should
not be affected by the units in which humans choose to measure
it.
    Tax collectors use Benford’s law to detect fake figures in tax
forms, because people who invent fictitious numbers tend to use
the same initial digits equally often. Probably because they think


...........................................
that’s what should happen for genuine figures!



Why Call It a Witch?
Maria Agnesi was born in 1718 and died in 1799. She was the
daughter of a wealthy silk merchant, Pietro Agnesi (often
wrongly said to have been a professor of mathematics at
Bologna), and the eldest of his 21 children. Maria was
precocious, and published an essay advocating higher education
for women when she was nine years old. The essay was actually
written by one of her tutors, but she translated it into Latin and
delivered it from memory to an academic gathering in the
garden of the family home. Her father also arranged for her to
debate philosophy in the presence of prominent scholars and
public figures. She disliked making a public spectacle of herself
and asked her father for permission to become a nun. When he
refused, she extracted an agreement that she could attend church
whenever she wished, wear simple clothing, and be spared from
all public events and entertainments.
110 // Why Call It a Witch?




                                     Maria Gaetana Agnesi.

    From that time on, she focused on religion and mathematics.
She wrote a book on differential calculus, printed privately
around 1740. In 1748 she published her most famous work,
Instituzioni Analitiche ad Uso Della Gioventù Italiana (‘Analytical
Institutions for the Use of the Youth of Italy’). In 1750 Pope
Benedict XIV invited her to become professor of mathematics at
the University of Bologna, and she was officially confirmed in
the role, but she never actually attended the university because
this would not have been in keeping with her humble lifestyle.
As a result, some sources say she was a professor and others say
she wasn’t. Was she, or wasn’t she? Yes.
    There is a famous curve, called the ‘witch of Agnesi’, which
has the equation

       xy2 ¼ a2 ða  xÞ

where a is a constant. The curve looks remarkably unlike a witch –
it isn’t even pointy:




       Witch of Agnesi.
                                        Möbius and His Band // 111



   So how did this strange name get attached to the curve?
   Fermat was the first to discuss this curve, in about 1700.
Maria Agnesi wrote about the curve in her book Instituzione
Analitiche. The word ‘witch’ was a mistake in translation. In 1718
Guido Grandi named the curve ‘versoria’, a Latin term for a rope
that turns a sail, because that’s what it looked like. In Italian this
term became ‘versiera’, which is what Agnesi called it. But John
Colson, who translated various mathematics books into English,
mistook ‘la versiera’ for ‘l’aversiera’, meaning ‘the witch’.


...........................................
   It could have been worse. Another meaning is ‘she-devil’.



Möbius and His Band
There are some pieces of mathematical folklore that you really
should be reminded about, even though they’re ‘well known’ –
just in case. An excellent example is the Möbius band.
    Augustus Möbius was a German mathematician, born 1790,
died 1868. He worked in several areas of mathematics, including
geometry, complex analysis and number theory. He is famous for
his curious surface, the Möbius band. You can make a Möbius
band by taking a strip of paper, say 2 cm wide and 20 cm long,
bending it round until the ends meet, then twisting one end
through 1808, and finally gluing the ends together. For
comparison, make a cylinder in the same way, omitting the
twist.




                                      Möbius band.




                                      Cylindrical band.
112 // Möbius and His Band



    The Möbius band is famous for one surprising feature: it has
only one side. If an ant crawls around on a cylindrical band, it
can cover only half the surface – one side of the band. But if an
ant crawls around on the Möbius band, it can cover the entire
surface. The Möbius band has only one side.
    You can check these statements by painting the band. You
can paint the cylinder so that one side is red and the other is
blue, and the two sides are completely distinct, even though they
are separated only by the thickness of the paper. But if you start
to paint the Möbius band red, and keep going until you run out
of band to paint, the whole thing ends up red.
    In retrospect, this is not such a surprise, because the 1808
twist connects each side of the original paper strip to the other. If
you don’t twist before gluing, the two sides stay separate. But
until Möbius (and a few others) thought this one up, mathe-
maticians didn’t appreciate that there are two distinct kinds of
surface: those with two sides, and those with one. This turned
out to be important in topology. And it showed how careful you
have to be about making ‘obvious’ assumptions.
    There are lots of Möbius band recreations. Here are three.

. If you cut the cylindrical band along the middle with scissors,
    it falls apart into two cylindrical bands. What happens if you
    try this with a Möbius band?
.   Repeat, but this time make the cut about one-third of the way
    across the width of the band. Now what happens to the
    cylinder, and to the band?
.   Make a band like a Möbius band but with a 3608 twist. How
    many sides does it have? What happens if you cut it along the
    middle?

The Möbius band is also known as a Möbius strip, but this can
lead to misunderstandings, as in a Limerick written by science
fiction author Cyril Kornbluth:
                                       Three More Quickies // 113



       A burleycue dancer, a pip
       Named Virginia, could peel in a zip;
          But she read science fiction
          and died of constriction
       Attempting a Möbius strip.
A more politically correct Möbius limerick, which gives away one
of the answers, is:
       A mathematician confided
       That a Möbius strip is one-sided.
           You’ll get quite a laugh
           if you cut it in half,
       For it stays in one piece when divided.


...........................................
   Answers on page 277



Golden Oldie
Why did the chicken cross the Möbius band?


...........................................
  To get to the other . . . um . . .



Three More Quickies
(1) If five dogs dig five holes in five days, how long does it take
ten dogs to dig ten holes? Assume that they all dig at the same
rate all the time and all holes are the same size.

(2) A woman bought a parrot in a pet-shop. The shop assistant,
who always told the truth, said, ‘I guarantee that this parrot will
repeat every word it hears.’ A week later, the woman took the
parrot back, complaining that it hadn’t spoken a single word.
‘Did anyone talk to it?’ asked the suspicious assistant. ‘Oh, yes.’
What is the explanation?

(3) The planet Nff-Pff in the Anathema Galaxy is inhabited by
precisely two sentient beings, Nff and Pff. Nff lives on a large
114 // Miles of Tiles



continent, in the middle of which is an enormous lake. Pff lives
on an island in the middle of the lake. Neither Nff nor Pff can
swim, fly or teleport: their only form of transport is to walk on
dry land. Yet each morning, one walks to the other’s house for
breakfast. Explain.


...........................................
   Answers on page 277



Miles of Tiles
Bathroom walls and kitchen floors provide everyday examples of
tiling patterns, using real tiles, plastic or ceramic. The simplest
pattern is made from identical square tiles, fitted together like
the squares of a chessboard. Over the centuries, mathematicians
and artists have discovered many beautiful tilings, and mathe-
maticians have gone a stage further by seeking all possible tilings
with particular features.
     For instance, exactly three regular polygons tile the entire
infinite plane – that is, identical tiles of that shape cover the
plane without overlaps or gaps. These polygons are the
equilateral triangle, the square and the hexagon:




       The three regular polygons that tile the plane.

    We can be confident that no other regular polygon tiles the
plane, by thinking about the angles at which the edges of the
tiles meet. If several tiles meet at a given point, the angles
involved must add to 3608. So the angle at the corner of a tile is
3608 divided by a whole number, say 360/m. As m gets larger, this
angle gets smaller. In contrast, as the number of sides of a regular
polygon increases, the angle at each corner gets bigger. The effect
                                                 Miles of Tiles // 115



of this is to ‘sandwich’ m within very narrow limits, and this in
turn restricts the possible polygons.
    The details go like this. When m ¼ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and so on,
360/m takes the values 360, 180, 120, 90, 72, 60, 5137, and so on.
The angle at the corner of a regular n-gon, for n = 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and
so on, is 60, 90, 108, 120, 12847, and so on. The only places where
these lists coincide are when m ¼ 3, 4, and 6; here n ¼ 6, 4 and 3.
    Actually, this proof as stated has a subtle flaw. What have I
forgotten to say?
    The most striking omission from my list is the regular
pentagon, which does not tile the plane. If you try to fit regular
pentagonal tiles together, they don’t fit. When three of them
meet at a common point, the total angle is 361088 ¼ 3248, less
than 3608. But if you try to make four of them meet, the total
angle is 461088 ¼ 4328, which is too big.
    Irregular pentagons can tile the plane, and so can innumer-
able other shapes. In fact, 14 distinct types of convex pentagon
are known to tile the plane. It is probable, but not yet proved,
that there are no others. You can find all 14 patterns at
www.mathpuzzle.com/tilepent.html
mathworld.wolfram.com/PentagonTiling.html
    The mathematics of tilings has important applications in
crystallography, where it governs how the atoms in a crystal can
be arranged, and what symmetries can occur. In particular,
crystallographers know that the possible rotational symmetries
of a regular lattice of atoms is tightly constrained. There are
2-fold, 3-fold, 4-fold and 6-fold symmetries – meaning that the
arrangement of atoms looks identical if the whole thing is
rotated through 12, 13, 14 or 16 of a full turn (3608). However,
5-fold symmetries are impossible – just as the regular pentagon
cannot tile the plane.
    There the matter stood until 1972, when Roger Penrose
discovered a new type of tiling, using two types of tile, which he
called kites and darts:
116 // Miles of Tiles




       A kite (left) and dart (right). The matching rules require the thick
       and thin arcs to meet at any join – see the pictures below.

    These shapes are derived from the regular pentagon, and the
associated tilings are required to obey certain ‘matching rules’
where several tiles meet, to avoid simple repetitive patterns.
Under these conditions, the two shapes can tile the plane, but
not by forming a repetitive lattice pattern. Instead, they form a
bewildering variety of complicated patterns. Precisely two of
these, called the star and sun patterns, have exact fivefold
rotational symmetry.




       The two fivefold-symmetric Penrose tilings. Left: star pattern;
       right: sun pattern. Tinted lines illustrate the matching rules.
       Black lines are edges of tiles.

   It then turned out that nature knows this trick. Some
chemical compounds can form ‘quasicrystals’ using Penrose
patterns for their atoms. These forms of matter are not regular
                                              Chaos Theory // 117



lattices, but they can occur naturally. So Penrose’s discovery
changed our ideas about natural arrangements of atoms in
crystal-like structures.
    The detailed mathematics and crystallography are too
complicated to describe here. To find out more, go to:
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penrose_tiling


...........................................
   Answers on page 278



Chaos Theory
If you want your friends to accept you as a ‘rocket scientist’, you
have to be able to spout about chaos theory. You will casually
mention the butterfly effect, and then you get to talk about
where Pluto (no longer a planet but a mere dwarf planet) will be
in 200 million years’ time, and how really good dishwashers
work.
    Chaos theory is the name given by the media to an important
new discovery in dynamical systems theory – the mathematics of
systems that change over time according to specific rules. The
name refers to a surprising and rather counterintuitive type of
behaviour known as deterministic chaos. A system is called
deterministic if its present state completely determines its future
behaviour; if not, the system is called stochastic or random.
Deterministic chaos – universally shortened to ‘chaos’ – is
apparently random behaviour in a deterministic dynamical
system. At first sight, this seems to be a contradiction in terms,
but the issues are quite subtle, and it turns out that some features
of deterministic systems can behave randomly.
    Let me explain why.
    You may remember the bit in Douglas Adams’s The Hitch
Hiker’s Guide to the Galaxy that parodies the concept of
determinism. No, really, you do – remember the supercomputer
Deep Thought? When asked for the answer to the Great Question
of Life, the Universe and Everything, it ruminates for five million
118 // Chaos Theory



years, and finally delivers the answer as 42. The philosophers
then realise that they didn’t actually understand the question,
and an even greater computer is given the task of finding it.
    Deep Thought is the literary embodiment of a ‘vast intellect’
envisaged by one of the great French mathematicians of the
eighteenth century, the Marquis de Laplace. He observed that
the laws of nature, as expressed mathematically by Isaac Newton
and his successors, are deterministic, saying that: ‘An intellect
which at a certain moment knew all forces that set nature in
motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is
composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these
data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the
movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of
the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be
uncertain and the future just like the past would be present
before its eyes.’
    In effect, Laplace was telling us that any deterministic system
is inherently predictable – in principle, at least. In practice,
however, we have no access to a Vast Intellect of the kind he had
in mind, so we can’t carry out the calculations that are needed to
predict the system’s future. Well, maybe for a short period, if
we’re lucky. For example, modern weather forecasts are fairly
accurate for about two days, but a ten-day forecast is often badly
wrong. (When it isn’t, they’ve got lucky.)
    Chaos raises another objection to Laplace’s vision: even if his
Vast Intellect existed, it would have to know ‘all positions of all
items’ with perfect accuracy. In a chaotic system, any uncertainty
about the present state grows very rapidly as time passes. So we
quickly lose track of what the system will be doing. Even if this
initial uncertainty first shows up in the millionth decimal place
of some measurement – with the previous 999,999 decimal
places absolutely correct – the predicted future based on one
value for that millionth decimal place will be utterly different
from a prediction based on some other value.
    In a non-chaotic system such uncertainties grow fairly
slowly, and very long-term predictions can be made. In a chaotic
                                              Chaos Theory // 119



system, inevitable errors in measuring its state now mean that its
state a short time ahead may be completely uncertain.
    A (slightly artificial) example may help to clarify this effect.
Suppose that the state of some system is represented by a real
number – an infinite decimal – between 0 and 10. Perhaps its
current value is 5.430 874, say. To keep the maths simple,
suppose that time passes in discrete intervals – 1, 2, 3, and so on.
Let’s call these intervals ‘seconds’ for definiteness. Further,
suppose that the rule for the future behaviour is this: to find the
‘next’ state – the state one second into the future – you take the
current state, multiply by 10, and ignore any initial digit that
would make the result bigger than 10. So the current value
5.430 874 becomes 54.308 74, and you ignore the initial digit 5 to
get the next state, 4.308 74. Then, as time ticks on, successive
states are:

       5:430 874
       4:308 74
       3:0874
       0:874
       8:74
       7:4

and so on.
     Now suppose that the initial measurement was slightly
inaccurate, and should have been 5.430 824 – differing in the
fifth decimal place. In most practical circumstances, this is a very
tiny error. Now the predicted behaviour would be:

       5:430824
       4:30824
       3:0824
       0:824
       2:4

See how that 2 moves one step to the left at each step – making
the error ten times as big each time. After a mere 5 seconds, the
120 // Chaos Theory



first prediction of 7.4 has changed to 2.4 – a significant
difference.
     If we had started with a million-digit number, and changed
the final digit, it would have taken a million seconds for the
change to affect the predicted first digit. But a million seconds is
only 1112 days. And most mathematical schemes for predicting
the future behaviour of a system work with much smaller
intervals of time – thousandths or millionths of seconds.
     If the rule for moving one time-step into the future is
different, this kind of error may not grow as quickly. For
example, if the rule is ‘divide the number by 2’, then the effect of
such a change dies away as we move further and further into the
future. So what makes a system chaotic, or not, is the rule for
forecasting its next state. Some rules exaggerate errors, some
filter them out.
     The first person to realise that sometimes the error can grow
rapidly – that the system may be chaotic, despite being
deterministic – was Henri Poincaré, in 1887. He was competing
for a major mathematical prize. King Oscar II of Norway and
Sweden offered 2,500 crowns to anyone who could calculate
whether the solar system is stable. If we wait long enough, will
the planets continue to follow roughly their present orbits, or
could something dramatic happen – such as two of them
colliding, or one being flung away into the depths of interstellar
space?
     This problem turned out to be far too difficult, but Poincaré
managed to make progress on a simpler question – a hypothet-
ical solar system with just three bodies. The mathematics, even
in this simplified set-up, was still extraordinarily difficult. But
Poincaré was up to the task, and he convinced himself that this
‘three-body’ system sometimes behaved in an irregular, unpre-
dictable manner. The equations were deterministic, but their
solutions were erratic.
     He wasn’t sure what to do about that, but he knew it must be
true. He wrote up his work, and won the prize.
                                            Chaos Theory // 121




                                                    Complicated
                                                    orbits for
                                                    three bodies
                                                    moving
                                                    under
                                                    gravity.

    And that was what everyone thought until recently. But in
1999 the historian June Barrow-Green discovered a skeleton in
Poincaré’s closet. The published version of his prizewinning
paper was not the one he submitted, not the one that won the
prize. The version he submitted – which was printed in a major
mathematical journal – claimed that no irregular behaviour
would occur. Which is the exact opposite of the standard story.
    Barrow-Green discovered that shortly after winning the prize,
an embarrassed Poincaré realised he had blundered. He withdrew
the winning memoir and paid for the entire print run of the
journal to be destroyed. Then he put his error right, and the
official published version is the corrected one. No one knew that
there had been a previous version until Barrow-Green discovered
a copy tucked away among the archives of the Mittag-Leffler
Institute in Stockholm.
    Anyway, Poincaré deserves full credit as the first person to
appreciate that deterministic mathematical laws do not always
imply predictable, regular behaviour. Another famous advance
was made by the meteorologist Edward Lorenz in 1961. He was
running a mathematical model of convection currents on his
computer. The machines available in those days were very slow
and cumbersome compared with what we have now – your
mobile phone is a far more powerful computer than the top
research machine of the 1960s. Lorenz had to stop his computer
in the middle of a long calculation, so he printed out all the
122 // Chaos Theory



numbers it had found. Then he went back several steps, input the
numbers at that point, and restarted the calculation. The reason
for backtracking was to check that the new calculation agreed
with the old one, to eliminate errors when he fed the old figures
back in.
    It didn’t.
    At first the new numbers were the same as the old ones, but
then they started to differ. What was wrong? Eventually Lorenz
discovered that he hadn’t typed in any wrong numbers. The
difference arose because the computer stored numbers to a few
more decimal places than it printed out. So what it stored as
2.371 45, say, was printed out as 2.371. When he typed that
number in for the second run, the computer began calculating
using 2.371 00, not 2.371 45. The difference grew – chaotically –
and eventually became obvious.
    When Lorenz published his results, he wrote: ‘One meteor-
ologist remarked that if the theory were correct, one flap of a




       (Left) Initial conditions for eight weather forecasts, apparently
       identical but with tiny differences. (Right) The predicted
       weather a week later – the initial differences have grown
       enormously. Italian weather is more predictable than British.
       [Courtesy of the European Medium Range Weather Forecasting
       Centre, Reading.]
                                                Chaos Theory // 123



seagull’s wings could change the course of weather for ever.’ The
objection was intended as a put-down, but we now know that
this is exactly what happens. Weather forecasters routinely make
a whole ‘ensemble’ of predictions, with slightly different initial
conditions, and then take a majority vote on the future, so to
speak.
    Before you rush out with a shotgun, I must add that there are
billions of seagulls, and we don’t get to run the weather twice.
What we end up with is a random selection from the range of
possible weathers that might have happened instead.
    Lorenz quickly replaced the seagull by a butterfly, because
that sounded better. In 1972 he gave a lecture with the title ‘Does
the flap of a butterfly’s wings in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas?’
The title was invented by Philip Merilees when Lorenz failed to
provide one. Thanks to this lecture, the mathematical point
concerned became known as the butterfly effect. It is a
characteristic feature of chaotic systems, and it is why they are
unpredictable, despite being deterministic. The slightest change
to the current state of the system can grow so rapidly that it
changes the future behaviour. Beyond some relatively small
‘prediction horizon’, the future must remain mysterious. It may
be predetermined, but we can’t find out what has been
predetermined, except by waiting to see what happens. Even a
big increase in computer speed makes little difference to this
horizon, because the errors grow so fast.
    For weather, the prediction horizon is about two days ahead.
For the solar system as a whole, it is far longer. We can predict
that in 200 million years’ time, Pluto will still be in much the
same orbit as it is today; however, we have no idea on which side
of the Sun it will be by then. So some features are predictable,
others are not.
    Although chaos is unpredictable, it is not random. This is the
whole point. There are hidden ‘patterns’, but you have to know
how to find them. If you plot the solutions of Lorenz’s model in
three dimensions, they form a beautiful, complicated shape
124 // Après-le-Ski



called a strange attractor. If you plotted random data that way,
you’d just get a fuzzy mess.




       The Lorenz attractor, a geometric representation of Lorenz’s
       calculations.

    Chaos may seem a useless phenomenon, on the grounds that
it prevents practical predictions. Even is this objection were
correct, chaos would still exist. The real world is not obliged to
behave in ways that are convenient for humans. As it happens,
there are ways to make use of chaos. For a time, a Japanese
company marketed a chaotic dishwasher, with two rotary arms
spraying water on its contents. The resulting irregular spray
cleaned the dishes better than the regular spray from a single
rotating arm would have done.
    And, of course, a dishwasher based on chaos theory was
obviously very scientific and advanced. The marketing people


...........................................
must have loved it.



Après-le-Ski
The little-known Alpine village of Après-le-Ski is situated in a
deep mountain valley with vertical cliffs on both sides. The cliffs
are 600 metres high on one side and 400 metres high on the
other. A cable car runs from the foot of each cliff to the top of the
                                             Pick’s Theorem // 125



other cliff, and the cables are perfectly straight. At what height
above the ground do the two cables cross?




                                     Find the height
                                     of the crossing.



...........................................
   Answer on page 278



Pick’s Theorem
Here is a lattice polygon: a polygon whose vertices lie on the
points of a square lattice. Assuming that the points are spaced at
intervals of one unit, what is the area of the polygon?




                                     A lattice polygon.

   There’s a wonderfully simple way to find such areas, however
complicated the polygon may be – by using Pick’s theorem. It was
proved by Georg Pick in 1899. For any lattice polygon, the area A
can be calculated from the number of boundary points B (grey)
and interior points I (black) by the formula

       A ¼ 12 B þ I  1

Here B ¼ 20 and I ¼ 8, so the area is 12 620 þ 8  1 ¼ 17 square
units.
126 // Mathematical Prizes



   What is the area of the lattice polygon in the second
diagram?




                                     Find the area.




...........................................
   Answer on page 279



Mathematical Prizes
There is no Nobel Prize in mathematics, but there are several
equally prestigious prizes and a vast range of smaller ones,
among them:

Fields Medal
The Fields Medal was instituted by the Canadian mathematician
John Charles Fields and was first awarded in 1936. Every four
years the International Mathematical Union selects for the award
up to four of the world’s leading research mathematicians, who
must be under 40 years old. The prize consists of a gold medal
and a small sum of money – currently around $13,500 – but is
considered equivalent to a Nobel Prize in prestige.

Abel Prize
In 2001 the Norwegian government commemorated the 200th
anniversary of the birth of Niels Henrik Abel – one of the all-time
greats of mathematics – with a new prize. Each year, one or more
mathematicians share a prize in the region of $1,000,000, which
is comparable to the sum that Nobel Prize winners receive. The
King of Norway presents the award at a special ceremony.
                                       Mathematical Prizes // 127



Shaw Prize
Sir Run Run Shaw, a prominent figure in Hong Kong’s media and
a long-standing philanthropist, established an annual prize for
three areas of science: astronomy, life sciences and medicine, and
mathematics. The total value awarded each year is $1,000,000,
and there is also a medal. The first Shaw Prize was awarded in
2002.

Clay Millennium Prizes
The Clay Mathematics Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
founded by Boston businessman Landon T. Clay and Lavinia D.
Clay, offers seven prizes, each of $1,000,000, for the definitive
solution of seven major open problems. These ‘Millennium Prize
Problems’ were selected to represent some of the biggest
challenges facing mathematicians. For the record, they are:

. The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture in algebraic
   number theory.
. The Hodge Conjecture in algebraic geometry.
. The existence of solutions, valid for all time, to the Navier–
   Stokes equations of fluid dynamics.
. The P = NP? problem in computer science.
. The Poincaré Conjecture in topology.
. The Riemann Hypothesis in complex analysis and the theory
   of prime numbers.
. The mass gap hypothesis and associated issues for the Yang–
   Mills equations in quantum field theory.

None of the prizes has yet been awarded, but the Poincaré
Conjecture has now been proved. The main breakthrough was
made by Grigori Perelman, and many details were clarified by
other mathematicians. For details of the seven problems, see
www.claymath.org/millennium/

King Faisal International Prize
Between 1977 and 1982 the King Faisal Foundation instituted
prizes for service to Islam, Islamic studies, Arabic literature,
medicine and science. The science prize is open to, and has been
128 // Why No Nobel for Maths?



won by, mathematicians. The winner receives a certificate, a gold
medal and SR 750 000 ($200,000).

Wolf Prize
Since 1978 this prize has been awarded by the Wolf Foundation,
set up by Ricardo Wolf and his wife Francisca Subirana Wolf. It
covers five areas of science: agriculture, chemistry, mathematics,
medicine and physics. The prize consists of a diploma and
$100,000.

Beal Prize
In 1993 Andrew Beal, a Texan with a passion for number theory,
was led to conjecture that if ap þ bq ¼ cr , where a, b, c, p, q and r
are positive integers, and p, q and r are all greater than 2, then a, b
and c must have a common factor. In 1997 he offered a prize,


...........................................
later increased to $100,000, for a proof or disproof.



Why No Nobel for Maths?
Why didn’t Alfred Nobel set up a mathematics prize? There’s a
persistent story that Nobel’s wife had an affair with the Swedish
mathematician Gosta Mittag-Leffler, so Nobel hated mathemat-
icians. But there’s a problem with this theory, because Nobel
never married. Some versions of the story replace the hypothet-
ical wife with a fiancée or a mistress. Nobel may have had a
mistress – a Viennese lady called Sophie Hess – but there’s no
evidence that she had anything to do with Mittag-Leffler.
    An alternative theory holds that Mittag-Leffler, who became
quite wealthy himself, did something to annoy Nobel. Since
Mittag-Leffler was the leading Swedish mathematician of the
time, Nobel realised that he was very likely to win a prize for
mathematics, and decided not to set one up. However, in 1985
Lars Gårding and Lars Hörmander noted that Nobel left Sweden
in 1865, to live in Paris, and seldom returned – and in 1865
Mittag-Leffler was a young student. So there was little opportu-
nity for them to interact, which casts doubt on both theories.
                                  Is There a Perfect Cuboid? // 129



    It’s true that late in Nobel’s life, Mittag-Leffler was chosen to
negotiate with him about leaving to the Stockholm Högskola
(which later became the University) a significant amount of
money in his will, and this attempt eventually failed – but
presumably Mittag-Leffler wouldn’t have been chosen if he’d
already offended Nobel. In any case, Mittag-Leffler wasn’t likely
to win a mathematical Nobel if one existed – there were plenty of
more prominent mathematicians around. So it seems more likely
that it simply never occurred to Nobel to award a prize for
mathematics, or that he considered the idea and rejected it, or
that he didn’t want to spend even more cash.
    Despite this, several mathematicians and mathematical
physicists have won the prize for work in other areas – physics,
chemistry, physiology/medicine, even literature. They have also
won the ‘Nobel’ in economics – the Prize in Economic Sciences
in Memory of Alfred Nobel, established by the Sveriges Riksbank


...........................................
in 1968.



Is There a Perfect Cuboid?
It is easy to find rectangles whose sides and diagonals are whole
numbers – this is the hoary old problem of Pythagorean
triangles, and it has been known since antiquity how to find all
of them (page 58). Using the classical recipe, it is not too hard to
find a cuboid – a box with rectangular sides – such that its sides,
and the diagonals of all its faces, are whole numbers. The first set
of values given below achieves this. But what no one has yet been
able to find is a perfect cuboid – one in which the ‘long diagonal’
between opposite corners of the cuboid is also a whole number.
130 // Paradox Lost




                                               Make all lengths
                                               integers.



    With the notation in the diagram, and bearing Pythagoras in
mind, we have to find a, b and c so that all four of the numbers
a2 þ b2 ; a2 þ c2 ; b2 þ c2 and a2 þ b2 þ c2 are perfect squares – equal,
respectively, to p2 ; q2 ; r2 and s2 . The existence of such numbers
has neither been proved nor disproved, but some ‘near misses’
have been found:

        a ¼ 240; b ¼ 117; c ¼ 44; p ¼ 267; q ¼ 244; r ¼ 125;
          but s is not an integer
        a ¼ 672; b ¼ 153; c ¼ 104; q ¼ 680; r ¼ 185; s ¼ 697;
          but p is not an integer
        a ¼ 18;720; b ¼ 211;773;121; c ¼ 7;800; p ¼ 23;711;
          q ¼ 20;280; r ¼ 16;511; s ¼ 24;961; but b is not an integer

If there is a perfect cuboid, it involves big numbers: it has been


...........................................
proved that the smallest edge is at least 232 ¼ 4;294;967;296.



Paradox Lost
In mathematical logic, a paradox is a self-contradictory statement
– the best known is ‘This sentence is a lie.’ Another is Bertrand
Russell’s ‘barber paradox’. In a village there is a barber who
shaves everyone who does not shave themselves. So who shaves
the barber? Neither ‘the barber’ nor ‘someone else’ is logically
acceptable. If it is the barber, then he shaves himself – but we are
told that he doesn’t. But if it’s someone else, then the barber does
                         When Will My MP3 Player Repeat? // 131



not shave himself . . . but we are told that he shaves all such
people, so he does shave himself.
     In the real world, there are plenty of get-outs (are we talking
about shaving beards here, or legs, or what? Is the barber a
woman? Can such a barber actually exist anyway?) But in
mathematics, a more carefully stated version of Russell’s paradox
ruined the life’s work of Gottlob Frege, who attempted to base
the whole of mathematics on set theory – the study of collections
of objects, and how these can be combined to form other
collections.
     Here’s another famous (alleged) paradox:
     Protagoras was a Greek lawyer who lived and taught in the
fifth century BC. He had a student, and it was agreed that the
student would pay for his teaching after he had won his first case.
But the student didn’t get any clients, and eventually Protagoras
threatened to sue him. Protagoras reckoned that he would win
either way: if the court upheld his case, the student would be
required to pay up, but if Protagoras lost, then by their
agreement the student would have to pay anyway. The student
argued exactly the other way round: if Protagoras won, then by
their agreement the student did not have to pay, but if Protagoras
lost, the court would have ruled that the student did not have to
pay.
     Is this a genuine logical paradox or not?


...........................................
   Answer on page 279



When Will My MP3 Player Repeat?
You have 1,000 songs on your MP3 player. If it plays songs ‘at
random’, how long would you expect to wait before the same
song is repeated?
   It all depends on what ‘at random’ means. The leading MP3
player on the market ‘shuffles’ songs just like someone shuffling
a pack of cards. Once the list has been shuffled, all songs are
132 // When Will My MP3 Player Repeat?



played in order. If you don’t reshuffle, it will take 1,001 songs to
get a repeat. However, it is also possible to pick a song at random,
and keep repeating this procedure without eliminating that
song. If so, the same song might – just – come up twice in a row.
I’ll assume that all songs appear with the same probability,
though some MP3 players bias the choice in favour of songs you
play a lot.
     You’ve probably met the same problem with birthdays
replacing songs. If you ask people their birthday, one at a time,
then on average how many do you have to ask to get a repeat?
The answer is 23, remarkably small. There is a second, super-
ficially similar problem: how many people should there be at a
party so that the probability that at least two share a birthday is
bigger than 12? Again the answer is 23. In both calculations we
ignore leap years and assume that any particular birthday occurs
with probability 1/365. This isn’t quite accurate, but it simplifies
the sums. We also assume that all individuals have statistically
independent birthdays, which would not be the case if, say, the
party included twins.
     I’ll solve the second birthday problem, because the sums are
easier to understand. The trick is to imagine the people entering
the room one at a time, and to work out, at each stage, the
probability that all birthdays so far are different. Subtract the
result from 1 and you get the probability that at least two are
equal. So we want to continue allowing people to enter until the
probability that all birthdays are different drops below 12.
     When the first person enters, the probability that their
birthday is different from that of anyone else present is 1,
because nobody else is present. I’ll write that as the fraction
       365
       365
because it tells us that out of the 365 possible birthdays, all 365
have the required outcome.
   When the second person enters, their birthday has to be
                          When Will My MP3 Player Repeat? // 133



different, so there are now only 364 choices out of 365. So the
probability we want is now
       365 364
          6
       365 365
When the third person enters, they have only 363 choices, and
the probability of no duplication so far is
       365 364 363
          6   6
       365 365 365
The pattern should now be clear. After k people have entered, the
probability that all k birthdays are distinct is
       365 364 363       365  k þ 1
          6   6    66
       365 365 365           365
and we want the first k for which this is less than 12. Each fraction,
other than the first, is smaller than 1, so the probability decreases
as k increases. Direct calculation shows that when k ¼ 22 the
fraction equals 0.524 305, and when k is 23 it equals 0.492 703.
So the required number of people is 23.
    This number seems surprisingly small, which may be because
we confuse the question with a different one: how many people
do you have to ask for the probability that one of them has the
same birthday as you to be bigger than 12? The answer to that is
much bigger – in fact, it’s 253.
    The same calculation with 1,000 songs on an MP3 player
shows that if each song is chosen at random then you have to
play a mere 38 songs to make the probability of a repeat bigger
than 12. The average number of songs you have to play to get a
repeat is 39 – slightly more.
    These sums are all very well, but they don’t provide much
insight. What if you had a million songs? It’s a big sum – a
computer can do it, though. But is there a simpler answer? We
can’t expect an exact formula, but we ought to be able to find a
134 // Six Pens



good approximation. Let’s say we have n songs. Then it turns out
that on average we have to play approximately
       p1 p              p
         ð2 pÞ n ¼ 1:2533 n

songs to get a repeat (of some song already played, not necessarily
the first one). To make the probability of a repeat greater than 12,
we have to play approximately
        p        p
          ðlog 4Þ n

songs, which is
             p
       1:1774 n

This is about 6% smaller.
    Both numbers are proportional to the square root of n, which
grows much more slowly than n. This is why we get quite small
answers when n is large. If you did have a million songs on your
MP3 player, then on average you would have to play only 1,253
of them to get a repeat (the square root of a million is 1,000). And
to make the probability of a repeat greater than 12, you would
have to play approximately 1,177 of them. The exact answer,


...........................................
according to my computer, is 1,178.



Six Pens
Farmer Hogswill has run into another mathematico-agricultural
problem. He had carefully assembled 13 identical fence panels to
create 6 identical pens for his rare-breed Alexander-horned pigs.
But during the night some antisocial person stole one of his
panels. So now he needs to use 12 fence panels to create 6
identical pens. How can he achieve this? All 12 panels must be
used.
                                          Patented Primes // 135




                                                   13 panels
                                                   making 6 pens.




...........................................
   Answer on page 280



Patented Primes
Because of their importance in encryption algorithms, prime
numbers have commercial significance. In 1994 Roger Schlafly
obtained US Patent 5,373,560 on two primes. The patent states
them as hexadecimal (base-16) numbers, but I’ve converted
them into decimal. They are:

       7;994;412;097;716;110;548;127;211;733;331;600;522;933;
       776;757;046;707;649;963;673;962;686;200;838;432;950;239;
       103;981;070;728;369;599;816;314;646;482;720;706;826;018;
       360;181;196;843;154;224;748;382;211;019

and

       103;864;912;054;654;272;074;839;999;186;936;834;171;066;
       194;620;139;675;036;534;769;616;693;904;589;884;931;513;
       925;858;861;749;077;079;643;532;169;815;633;834;450;952;
       832;125;258;174;795;234;553;238;258;030;222;937;772;878;
       346;831;083;983;624;739;712;536;721;932;666;180;751;292;
       001;388;772;039;413;446;493;758;317;344;413;531;957;900;
       028;443;184;983;069;698;882;035;800;332;668;237;985;846;
       170;997;572;388;089

He did this to publicise deficiencies in the US patent system.
   Legally, you can’t use these numbers without Schlafly’s


...........................................
permission. Hmmm . . .
136 // The Poincaré Conjecture



The Poincaré Conjecture
Towards the end of the nineteenth century, mathematicians
succeeded in finding all possible ‘topological types’ of surfaces.
Two surfaces have the same topological type if one of them can
be continuously deformed into the other. Imagine that the
surface is made from flexible dough. You can stretch it, squeeze
it, twist it – but you can’t tear it, or squash different bits
together.
     To keep the story simple, I’ll assume that the surface has no
boundary, that it’s orientable (two-sided, unlike the Möbius
band) and that it’s of finite extent. The nineteenth-century
mathematicians proved that every such surface is topologically
equivalent to a sphere, a torus, a torus with two holes, a torus
with three holes, and so on.




            Sphere.               Torus.         Two-holed torus.

    ‘Surface’ here really does refer only to the surface. A
topologist’s sphere is like a balloon – an infinitely thin sheet of
rubber. A torus is shaped like an inner tube for a tyre (for those of
you who know what an inner tube is). So the ‘dough’ I just
mentioned is really a very thin sheet, not a solid lump.
Topologists call a solid sphere a ‘ball’.
    To achieve their classification of all surfaces, the topologists
had to characterise them ‘intrinsically’, without reference to
any surrounding space. Think of an ant living on the surface,
ignorant of any surrounding space. How can it work out which
surface it inhabits? By 1900 it was understood that a good way
to answer such questions is to think about closed loops in the
surface, and how these loops can be deformed. For example, on
                                   The Poincaré Conjecture // 137



a sphere (by which I mean just the surface, not the solid
interior) any closed loop can be continuously deformed to a
point – ‘shrunk’. For example, the circle running round the
equator can be gradually moved towards the south pole,
becoming smaller and smaller until it coincides with the pole
itself:




                                            How to shrink a loop on
                                            a sphere continuously to
                                            a point.

    In contrast, every surface that is not equivalent to a sphere
contains loops, which cannot be deformed to points. Such loops
‘pass through a hole’, and the hole prevents them from being
shrunk. So the sphere can be characterised as the only surface on
which any closed loop can be shrunk to a point.
    Observe, however, that the ‘hole’ that we see in a picture is
not actually part of the surface. By definition, it’s a place where
the surface isn’t. If we think intrinsically, we can’t talk sensibly
about holes if we try to visualise them in the usual manner. The
ant who lives on the surface and knows no other universe can’t
see that his torus has a dirty great hole in it – any more than we
can look along a fourth dimension. So although I’m using the
word ‘hole’ to explain why the loop can’t be shrunk, a
topological proof runs along different lines.
138 // The Poincaré Conjecture




                                                        On all other
                                                        surfaces, loops
                                                        can get stuck.

     In 1904 Henri Poincaré was trying to take the next step, and
understand ‘manifolds’– three-dimensional analogues of surfaces
– and for a time he assumed that the characterisation of a sphere
in terms of shrinking loops is also true in three dimensions,
where there is a natural analogue of the sphere called the
3-sphere. A 3-sphere is not just a solid ball, but it can be visualised
– if that’s the word – by taking a solid ball and pretending that its
entire surface is actually just a single point.
     Imagine doing the same with a circular disc. The rim closes up
like the top of a bag as you draw a string tight round its edge, and
the result is topologically a sphere. Now go up a dimension . . .




                                                        Turning a disc
                                                        into a sphere.

    At first, Poincaré thought that this characterisation of the
3-sphere should be obvious, or at least easily proved, but later he
realised that one plausible version of this statement is actually
wrong, while another closely related formulation seemed
difficult to prove but might well be true. He posed a deceptively
simple question: if a three-dimensional manifold (without
boundary, of finite extent, and so on) had the property that any
loop in it can be shrunk to a point, must that manifold be
topologically equivalent to the 3-sphere?
    Subsequent attempts to answer this question failed dismally,
                                   The Poincaré Conjecture // 139



although after a huge effort by the world’s topologists, the
answer has proved to be ‘yes’ for all versions in every dimension
higher than 3. The belief that the same answer applies in three
dimensions became known as the Poincaré Conjecture, famous as
one of the eight Millennium Prize Problems (page 127).
     In 2002 a Russian-born mathematician, Grigori Perelman,
caused a sensation by placing several papers on arXiv.org, an
informal website for current research in physics and mathe-
matics. His papers were ostensibly about various properties of the
‘Ricci flow’, but it became clear that if the work was correct, it
implied that the Poincaré Conjecture is also correct. The idea of
using the Ricci flow dates to 1982, when Richard Hamilton
introduced a new technique based on mathematical ideas used
by Albert Einstein in general relativity. According to Einstein,
spacetime can be considered as curved, and the curvature
describes the force of gravity. Curvature is measured by some-
thing called the ‘curvature tensor’, and this has a simpler relative
known as the ‘Ricci tensor’ after its inventor, Gregorio Ricci-
Curbastro.
     According to general relativity, gravitational fields can
change the geometry of the universe as time passes, and these
changes are governed by the Einstein equations, which say that
the stress tensor is proportional to the curvature. In effect, the
gravitational bending of the universe tries to smooth itself out as
time passes, and the Einstein equations quantify that idea.
     The same game can be played using the Ricci version of
curvature, and it leads to the same kind of behaviour: a surface
that obeys the equations for the Ricci flow will naturally tend to
simplify its own geometry by redistributing its curvature more
evenly. Hamilton showed that the familiar two-dimensional
version of the Poincaré Conjecture, characterising the sphere,
can be proved using the Ricci flow. Basically, a surface in which
all loops shrink simplifies itself so much as it follows the Ricci
flow that it ends up being a perfect sphere. Hamilton suggested
generalising this approach to three dimensions, but he hit some
difficult obstacles.
140 // Hippopotamian Logic



     The main complication in three dimensions is that ‘singula-
rities’ can develop, where the manifold pinches together and the
flow breaks down. Perelman’s new idea was to cut the surface
apart near such a singularity, cap off the resulting holes, and
then allow the flow to continue. If the manifold manages to
simplify itself completely after only finitely many singularities
have arisen, then not only is the Poincaré Conjecture true, but a
more far-reaching result, the Thurston Geometrisation
Conjecture, is also true. And that tells us about all possible three-
dimensional manifolds.
     Now the story takes a curious turn. It is generally accepted
that Perelman’s work is correct, although his arXiv papers leave a
lot of gaps that have to be filled in correctly, and that has turned
out to be quite difficult. Perelman had his own reasons for not
wanting the prize – indeed, any reward save the solution itself –
and decided not to expand his papers into something suitable for
publication, although he was generally willing to explain how to
fill in various details if anyone asked him. Experts in the area
were forced to develop their own versions of his ideas.
     Perelman was also awarded a Fields Medal at the Madrid
International Congress of Mathematicians in 2006, the top prize


...........................................
in mathematics. He turned that down, too.



Hippopotamian Logic
       I won’t eat my hat.
       If hippos don’t eat acorns, then oak trees will grow in
       Africa.
       If oak trees don’t grow in Africa, then squirrels hibernate
       in winter.
       If hippos eat acorns and squirrels hibernate in winter,
       then I’ll eat my hat.
       Therefore – what?


...........................................
   Answer on page 280
                                              Langton’s Ant // 141



Langton’s Ant
Langton’s ant was invented by Christopher Langton, and it
shows how amazingly complex simple ideas can be. It leads to
one of the most baffling unsolved problems in the whole of
mathematics, and all from astonishingly simple ingredients.
    The ant lives on an infinite square grid of black and white
cells, and it can face in one of the four compass directions: north,
south, east or west. At each tick of a clock it moves one cell
forward, and then follows three simple rules:

. If it lands on a black cell it makes a 908 turn to the left.
. If it lands on a white cell it makes a 908 turn to the right.
. The cell that it has just vacated then changes colour, from
   white to black, or vice versa.




                                                     Effect of the
                                                     ant moving.
                                                     Grey cells can
                                                     be any colour
                                                     and do not
                                                     change on this
                                                     move.

   As a warm-up, the ant starts by facing east on a completely
white grid. Its first move takes it to a white square, while the
square it started from turns black. Because it is on a white square,
the ant’s next move is a right turn, so now it faces south. That
142 // Langton’s Ant



takes it to a new white square, and the square it has just vacated
turns black. After a few more moves the ant starts to revisit earlier
squares that have turned black, so it then turns to the left
instead. As time passes, the ant’s motion gets quite complicated,
and so does the ever-changing pattern of black and white squares
that trails behind it.
    Jim Propp discovered that the first few hundred moves
occasionally produce a nice, symmetrical pattern. Then things
get rather chaotic for about ten thousand moves. After that, the
ant gets trapped in a cycle in which the same sequence of 104
moves is repeated indefinitely, each cycle moving it two squares
diagonally. It continues like this for ever, systematically building
a broad diagonal ‘highway’.




                                        Langton’s ant builds a
                                        highway.

    This ‘order out of chaos’ behaviour is already puzzling, but
computer experiments suggest something more surprising. If you
scatter any finite number of black squares on the grid, before the
ant sets off, it still ends up building a highway. It may take longer
to do so, and its initial movements may be very different, but
ultimately that’s what will happen. As an example, the second
diagram shows a pattern that forms when the ant starts inside a
solid rectangle. Before building its highway, the ant builds a
‘castle’ with straight walls and complicated crenellations. It
keeps destroying and rebuilding these structures in a curiously
purposeful way, until it gets distracted and wanders off –
building a highway.
                                               Pig on a Rope // 143




                                             Pattern created by
                                             Langton’s ant when it
                                             starts inside a black
                                             rectangle. The highway
                                             is at the lower right.
                                             Small white dots mark
                                             squares of the original
                                             rectangle that have
                                             never been visited.

     The problem that is baffling mathematicians is to prove that
the ant always ends up building a highway, for every initial
configuration of finitely many black squares. Or disprove that, if
it’s wrong. We do know that the ant can never get trapped inside
any bounded region of the grid – it always escapes if you wait


...........................................
long enough. But we don’t know that it escapes along a highway.



Pig on a Rope
Farmer Hogswill owns a field, which is a perfect equilateral
triangle, each side 100 metres long. His prize pig Pigasus is tied to
one corner, so that the portion of the field that Pigasus can reach
is exactly half the total area. How long is the rope?
    You may – indeed, must – assume that the pig has zero size
(which admittedly is pretty silly) and that the rope is infinitely
thin and any necessary knots can be ignored.




                                      Pigs may safely graze . . . over
                                      half the area of the field.




...........................................
   Answer on page 280
144 // The Surprise Examination



The Surprise Examination
This paradox is so famous that I nearly left it out. It raises some
intriguing issues.
    Teacher tells the class that there will be a test one day next
week (Monday to Friday), and that it will be a surprise. This
seems reasonable: the teacher can choose any day out of five, and
there is no way that the students can know which day it will be.
But the students don’t see things that way at all. They reason that
the test can’t be on Friday – because if it was, then as soon as
Thursday passed without a test, they’d know it had to be Friday,
so no surprise. And once they’ve ruled out Friday, they apply the
same reasoning to the remaining four days of the week, so the
test can’t be on Thursday, either. In which case it can’t be on
Wednesday, so it can’t be on Tuesday, so it can’t be on Monday.
Apparently, no surprise test is possible.
    That’s all very well, but if the teacher decides to set the test
on Wednesday, there seems to be no way that the students could
actually know the day ahead of time! Is this a genuine paradox or
not?


...........................................
   Answer on page 281



Antigravity Cone
In defiance of the Law of Gravity, this double cone rolls uphill.
Here’s how to make it.




                                                       Five pieces
                                                       to cut out.
                                       Mathematical Jokes 2 // 145



    Copy the five shapes on to a thin sheet of card, two or three
times the size shown here, and cut them out. On piece A, glue
flap v to edge v to make a cone. On piece B, glue flap w to edge w
to make a second cone. Then glue the two cones base to base
using the triangular flaps on A.
    Glue flap x of C to edge x of D, and flap y of C to edge y of E.
Finally, glue flap z of D to edge z of E to make a triangular ‘fence’.
    Place the double cone at the lower end of this triangle, and
let go. It will appear to roll uphill.
    How can this happen?




                                              A rolling cone gathers
                                              no gravity.




...........................................
   Answer on page 282



Mathematical Jokes 2
An engineer, a physicist, and a mathematician are staying in a
hotel. The engineer wakes up and smells smoke. He goes into the
hallway, sees a fire, fills the wastepaper basket from his room
with water, and pours it on the fire, putting it out.
    Later, the physicist wakes up and smells smoke. He goes into
the hallway and sees a (second) fire. He pulls a fire hose off the
wall. Having calculated the temperature of the exothermic
reaction, the velocity of the flame front, the water pressure in the
146 // Why Gauss Became a Mathematician



hose, and so on, he uses the hose to put out the fire with the
minimum expenditure of energy.
    Later, the mathematician wakes up and smells smoke. He
goes into the hallway and sees a (third) fire. He notices the fire
hose on the wall, and thinks for a moment . . . Then he says, ‘OK,


...........................................
a solution exists!’ – and goes back to bed.



Why Gauss Became a Mathematician




                                    Carl Friedrich Gauss.

   Carl Friedrich Gauss was born in Brunswick in 1777 and died
in Göttingen in 1855. His parents were uneducated manual
workers, but he became one of the greatest mathematicians ever;
many consider him the best. He was precocious – he is said to
have pointed out a mistake in his father’s financial calculations
when he was three. At the age of nineteen he had to decide
whether to study mathematics or languages, and the decision
was made for him when he discovered how to construct a regular
17-sided polygon using the traditional Euclidean tools of an
unmarked ruler and a compass.
   This may not sound like much, but it was totally unprece-
dented, and the discovery led to a new branch of number theory.
Euclid’s Elements contains constructions for regular polygons (all
                      Why Gauss Became a Mathematician // 147



sides equal length, all angles equal) with 3, 4, 5, 6 and 15 sides,
and the ancient Greeks knew that the number of sides could be
doubled as often as you wish. Up to 100, the number of sides in a
constructible (regular) polygon – as far as the Greeks knew – must
be

       2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 8; 10; 12; 15; 16; 20; 24; 30; 32; 40;
       48; 60; 64; 80; 96

For more than two thousand years, everyone assumed that no
other polygons were constructible. In particular, Euclid does not
tell us how to construct 7-gons or 9-gons, and the reason is that
he had no idea how this might be done. Gauss’s discovery was a
bombshell, adding 17, 34 and 68 to the list. Even more
amazingly, his methods prove that other numbers, such as 7, 9,
11 and 13, are impossible. (The polygons do exist, but you can’t
construct them by Euclidean methods.)
     Gauss’s construction depends on two simple facts about the
number 17: it is prime, and it is one greater than a power of 2.
The whole problem pretty much reduces to finding which prime
numbers correspond to constructible polygons, and powers of 2
come into the story because every Euclidean construction boils
down to taking a series of square roots – which in particular
implies that the lengths of any lines that feature in the
construction must satisfy algebraic equations whose degree is a
power of two. The key equation for the 17-gon is

       x16 þ x15 þ x14 þ x13 þ x12 þ x11 þ x10 þ x9 þ x8 þ x7 þ x6
           þ x5 þ x4 þ x3 þ x2 þ x þ 1 ¼ 0

where x is a complex number. The 16 solutions, together with the
number 1, form the vertices of a regular 17-gon in the complex
plane. Since 16 is a power of 2, Gauss realised that he was in with
a chance. He did some clever calculations, and proved that the
148 // Why Gauss Became a Mathematician



17-gon can be constructed provided you can construct a line
whose length is
         "
       1              pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃpﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
            1 þ 17 þ 34  2 17 þ
       16
         qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ#
                         p                   p                p                          p           p                p
           68 þ 12 17  16 34 þ 2 17  2ð1  17Þð 34  2 17Þ


Since you can always construct square roots, this effectively
solves the problem, and Gauss didn’t bother to describe the
precise steps needed – the formula itself does that. Later, other
mathematicians wrote down explicit constructions. Ulrich von
Huguenin published the first in 1803, and H.W. Richmond
found a simpler one in 1893.




              Richmond’s method for constructing a regular 17-gon. Take two
              perpendicular radii, AOP0 and BOC, of a circle. Make 4OB  OJ
                                                                           ¼1
                          OJE
              and angle 4OJP  0
                                ¼ 1. Find F Such that angle EJF is 458. Draw a
              circle with FP0 as diameter, meeting OB at K. Draw the circle
              with centre E through K, cutting AP0 in G and H. Draw HP3 and
              GP5 perpendicular to AP0. Then P0, P3 and P5 are respectively
              the 0th, 3rd and 5th vertices of a regular 17-gon, and the other
              vertices are now easily constructed.

    Gauss’s method proves that a regular n-gon can be con-
structed whenever n is a prime of the form 2k þ 1. Primes like this
are called Fermat primes, because Fermat investigated them. In
                       Why Gauss Became a Mathematician // 149



particular he noticed that k must itself be a power of 2 if 2k þ 1 is
going to be prime. The values k = 1, 2, 4, 8 and 16 yield the
Fermat primes 3, 5, 17, 257 and 65,537. However, 232 þ 1 ¼
4;294;967;297 ¼ 64166;700;417 is not prime. Gauss was aware that
the regular n-gon is constructible if and only if n is a power of 2,
or a power of 2 multiplied by distinct Fermat primes. But he
didn’t give a complete proof – probably because to him it was
obvious.
    His results prove that it is impossible to construct regular 7-,
11- or 13-gons by Euclidean methods, because these are prime
but not of Fermat type. The analogous equation for the 7-gon, for
instance, is x6 þ x5 þ x4 þ x3 þ x2 þ x þ 1 ¼ 0, and that has degree
6, which is not a power of 2. The 9-gon is not constructible
because 9 is not a product of distinct Fermat primes – it is 363,
and 3 is a Fermat prime, but the same prime occurs twice here.
    The Fermat primes just listed are the only known ones. If there
is another, it must be absolutely gigantic: in the current state of
knowledge the first candidate is 233;554;432 þ 1, where
33;554;432 ¼ 225 . Although we’re still not sure exactly which
regular polygons are constructible, the only obstacle is the
possible existence of very large Fermat primes. A useful website
for Fermat primes is mathworld.wolfram.com/FermatNumber.html
    In 1832 Friedrich Julius Richelot published a construction for
the regular 257-gon. Johann Gustav Hermes of Lingen University
devoted ten years to the 65,537-gon, and his unpublished work
can be found at the University of Göttingen, but it probably
contains errors.
    With more general construction techniques, other numbers
are possible. If you use a gadget for trisecting angles, then the
9-gon is easy. The 7-gon turns out to be possible too, but that’s


...........................................
nowhere near as obvious.
150 // What Shape is a Crescent Moon?



What Shape is a Crescent Moon?
The Moon is low in the sky shortly after sunset or before dawn;
the bright part of its surface forms a beautiful crescent. The two
curves that form the boundary of the crescent resemble arcs of
circles, and are often drawn that way. Assuming the Moon to be a
perfect sphere, and the Sun’s rays to be parallel, are they arcs of
circles?




                             A crescent formed
                             by two arcs of
                             circles. Is the crescent
                             Moon like this?




...........................................
   Answer on page 283



Famous Mathematicians
All the people listed below – except one – either started a degree
(or joint degree) in mathematics, or studied under famous
mathematicians, or were professional mathematicians in their
other life. What are they famous for? Which person does not
belong on the list?
       Pierre Boulez                 Michael Jordan
       Sergey Brin                   Theodore Kaczynski
       Lewis Carroll                 John Maynard Keynes
       J.M. Coetzee                  Carole King
       Alberto Fujimori              Emanuel Lasker
       Art Garfunkel                 J.P. Morgan
       Philip Glass                  Larry Niven
       Teri Hatcher                  Alexander Solzhenitsyn
       Edmund Husserl                Bram Stoker
                                What is a Mersenne Prime? // 151




       Leon Trotsky                 Virginia Wade
       Eamon de Valera              Ludwig Wittgenstein
       Carol Vorderman              Sir Christopher Wren


...........................................
   Answers on page 284



What is a Mersenne Prime?
A Mersenne number is a number of the form 2n  1. That is, it is
one less than a power of 2. A Mersenne prime is a Mersenne
number that happens also to be prime. It is straightforward to
prove that in this case the exponent n must itself be prime. For
the first few primes, n ¼ 2, 3, 5 and 7, the corresponding
Mersenne numbers 3, 7, 31 and 127 are all prime.
     Interest in Mersenne numbers goes back a long way, and
initially it was thought that they are prime whenever n is prime.
However, in 1536 Hudalricus Regius proved that this assumption
is false, pointing out that 211  1 ¼ 2;047 ¼ 23689. In 1603 Pietro
Cataldi noted that 217  1 and 219  1 are prime, which is correct,
and claimed that n ¼ 23, 29, 31 and 37 also lead to primes.
Fermat proved that he was wrong for 23 and 37, and Euler
demolished his claim for 29. But Euler later proved that 231  1 is
prime.
     In his 1644 book Cogitata Physico-Mathematica, the French
monk Marin Mersenne stated that 2n  1 is prime when n is 2, 3,
5, 7, 13, 17, 19, 31, 67, 127 and 257 – and for no other values in
that range. Using the methods then available, he could not have
tested most of these numbers, so his claims were mainly
guesswork, but his name became associated with the problem.
     In 1876 Édouard Lucas developed a cunning way to test
Mersenne numbers to see if they are prime, and showed that
Mersenne was right for n ¼ 127. By 1947 all cases in Mersenne’s
range had been checked, and it turned out that he had
mistakenly included 67 and 257. He had also omitted 61, 89 and
152 // What is a Mersenne Prime?



107. Lucas improved his test, and in the 1930s Derrick Lehmer
found further improvements. The Lucas–Lehmer test uses the
sequence of numbers
                  4; 14; 194; 37634; . . .

in which each number is the square of the previous one,
decreased by 2. It can be proved that the nth Mersenne number is
prime if and only if it divides the (n  1)th term of this sequence.
This test can prove that a Mersenne number is composite
without finding any of its prime factors, and it can prove the
number is prime without testing for any prime factors. There’s a
trick to keep all numbers involved in the test smaller than the
Mersenne number concerned.
    Looking for new, larger Mersenne primes is an amusing way
to try out new, fast computers, and over the years prime-hunters
have extended the list. It now includes 44 primes:

                                         n              Year                     Discoverer
....................................................................................................................................................................
                                   2                    —                        known from antiquity
                                   3                    —                        known from antiquity
                                   5                    —                        known from antiquity
                                   7                    —                        known from antiquity
                                  13                    1456                     anonymous
                                  17                    1588                     Pietro Cataldi
                                  19                    1588                     Pietro Cataldi
                                  31                    1772                     Leonhard Euler
                                  61                    1883                     Ivan Pervushin
                                  89                    1911                     R.E. Powers*
                                 107                    1914                     R.E. Powers
                                 127                    1876                     Édouard Lucas
                                 521                    1952                     Raphael Robinson
                                 607                    1952                     Raphael Robinson
                               1,279                    1952                     Raphael Robinson
                               2,203                    1952                     Raphael Robinson
                               2,281                    1952                     Raphael Robinson
                               3,217                    1957                     Hans Riesel

*       Powers is a rather obscure, possibly amateur, mathematician. I
        haven’t been able to locate his first name.
                                                                               What is a Mersenne Prime? // 153



                       4,253                            1961                     Alexander Hurwitz
                       4,423                            1961                     Alexander Hurwitz
                       9,689                            1963                     Donald Gillies
                       9,941                            1963                     Donald Gillies
                      11,213                            1963                     Donald Gillies
                      19,937                            1971                     Bryant Tuckerman
                      21,701                            1978                     Landon Noll and Laura Nickel
                      23,209                            1979                     Landon Noll
                      44,497                            1979                     Harry Nelson and David Slowinski
                      86,243                            1982                     David Slowinski
                     110,503                            1988                     Walter Colquitt and Luther Welsh
                     132,049                            1983                     David Slowinski
                     216,091                            1985                     David Slowinski
                     756,839                            1992                     David Slowinski et al.
                     859,433                            1994                     David Slowinski and Paul Gage
                   1,257,787                            1996                     David Slowinski and Paul Gage
                   1,398,269                            1996                     Joel Armengaud et al.
                   2,976,221                            1997                     Gordon Spence et al.
                   3,021,377                            1998                     Roland Clarkson et al.
                   6,972,593                            1999                     Nayan Hajratwala et al.
                  13,466,917                            2001                     Michael Cameron et al.
                  20,996,011                            2003                     Michael Shafer et al.
                  24,036,583                            2004                     Josh Findley et al.
                  25,964,951                            2005                     Martin Nowak et al.
                  30,402,457                            2005                     Curtis Cooper et al.
                  32,582,657                            2006                     Curtis Cooper et al.
....................................................................................................................................................................

Up to and including the 39th Mersenne prime (n ¼ 13,466,917)
the list is complete, but there may be undiscovered Mersenne
primes in the gaps between the known ones after that. The 44th
known Mersenne prime, 232;582;657  1, has 9,808,358 decimal
digits and is currently (December 2007) the largest known prime.
Mersenne primes generally hold this record, thanks to the Lucas–
Lehmer test; however, we know from Euclid that there is no largest
prime. For up-to-date information, go to the Mersenne Primes
website primes.utm.edu/mersenne/; you can also join the Great


...........................................
Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) at www.mersenne.org/
154 // The Goldbach Conjecture



The Goldbach Conjecture
In 2000, as a publicity stunt for Apostolos Doxiadis’s novel Uncle
Petros and Goldbach’s Conjecture, the publisher Faber & Faber
offered a million-dollar prize for a proof of the conjecture,
provided it was submitted before April 2002. The prize was never
claimed, which mathematicians did not find surprising, because
the problem has resisted all efforts for more than 250 years.
    It began in 1742, when Christian Goldbach wrote to
Leonhard Euler, suggesting that every even integer is the sum of
two primes. (Apparently René Descartes had come across the
same idea a little earlier, but no one had noticed.) At that time
the number 1 was considered to be prime, so 2 ¼ 1 þ 1 was
acceptable, but nowadays we reformulate the the Goldbach
Conjecture thus: every even integer greater than 2 is the sum of
two primes – often in several different ways. For example,

        4¼2þ2
        6¼3þ3
        8¼5þ3
       10 ¼ 7 þ 3 ¼ 5 þ 5
       12 ¼ 7 þ 5
       14 ¼ 11 þ 3 ¼ 7 þ 7

Euler replied that he was sure Goldbach must be right, but he
couldn’t find a proof – and that remains true today. We do know
that every even integer is the sum of at most six primes – proved
by Olivier Ramaré in 1995. In 1973 Chen Jing-Run proved that
every sufficiently large even integer is the sum of a prime and a
semiprime (either a prime or a product of two primes).
    In 1998 Jean-Marc Deshouillers, Yannick Saouter and
Herman te Riele verified Goldbach’s Conjecture for all even
numbers up to 1014. By 2007, Oliveira e Silva had improved that
to 1018, and his computations continue. If the Riemann
Hypothesis (page 215) is true, then the Odd Goldbach
Conjecture – that every odd integer greater than 5 is the sum of
three primes – is a consequence of the 1998 result.
                                     Turtles All the Way Down // 155




        Graph showing in how many ways (vertical axis) a given even
        number (horizontal axis) can be expressed as a sum of two
        primes. The lowest points in the graph move upwards as we go
        from left to right, indicating that there are many ways to achieve
        this. However, for all we know an occasional point might fall on
        the horizontal axis. Just one such point would disprove the
        Goldbach Conjecture.

    In 1923 Godfrey Hardy and John Littlewood obtained a
heuristic formula – one that they could not prove rigorously, but
looked plausible – for the number of different ways to write a
given even integer as a sum of two primes. This formula, which
agrees with numerical evidence, indicates that when the number
gets large, there are many ways to write it as a sum of two primes.
Therefore we may expect the smallest of the two primes to be
relatively tiny. In 2001 Jörg Richstein observed that for numbers
up to 1014, the smaller prime is at most 5,569, and this occurs for
       389;965;026;819;938 ¼ 5;569 þ 389;965;814;369

...........................................
Turtles All the Way Down
Infinity is a slippery idea. People talk fairly casually of ‘eternity’ –
an infinite period of time. According to the Big Bang theory, the
universe came into being about 13 billion years ago. Not only
156 // Turtles All the Way Down



was there no universe before then – there was no ‘before’ before
then.* Some people worry about that, and most of them seem
much happier with the idea that the universe ‘has always
existed’. That is, its past has already been infinitely long.
    This alternative seems to solve the difficult question of the
origin of the universe, by denying that it ever had an origin. If
something has always been here, it’s silly to ask why it’s here
now. Isn’t it?
    Probably. But that still doesn’t explain why it’s always been
here.
    This can be a difficult point to grasp. To bring it into
perspective, let me compare it with a rather different proposal.
There is an amusing (and very likely true) tale that a famous
scientist – Stephen Hawking is often mentioned because he told
the story in A Brief History of Time – was giving a lecture about the
universe, and a lady in the audience pointed out that the Earth
floats in space because it rests on the back of four elephants,
which in turn rest on the back of a turtle.
    ‘Ah, but what supports the turtle?’ the scientist asked.
    ‘Don’t be silly,’ she said. ‘It’s turtles all the way down!’




                             Turtles all the
                             way down.


*   Some cosmologists now think that there could have been
    something before the Big Bang after all – our universe may be
    part of a ‘multiverse’ in which individual universes could come
    into existence or fade away again. The theory is nice, but it’s
    difficult to find any way to test it.
                                                 Hilbert’s Hotel // 157



    All very amusing, and we don’t buy that explanation. A self-
supporting pile of turtles is ludicrous, and not just because it’s
turtles. Each turtle being supported by a previous one just
doesn’t look like an explanation of how the whole pile stays up.
    Very well. But now replace the Earth by the present state of
the universe, and replace each turtle by the previous state of the
universe. Oh, and change ‘support’ to ‘cause’. Why does the
universe exist? Because a previous one did. Why did that one
exist? Because a previous one did. Did it all start a finite time in
the past? No, it’s universes all the way back.*
    So a universe that has always existed is at least as puzzling as


...........................................
one that has not.



Hilbert’s Hotel
Among the paradoxes concerning the infinite are a series of
bizarre events at Hilbert’s Hotel. David Hilbert was one of the
world’s leading mathematicians around 1900. He worked in the
logical foundations of mathematics and took a particular interest
in infinity. Anyway, Hilbert’s Hotel has infinitely many rooms,
numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on – every positive integer.
    One bank holiday weekend, the hotel was completely full. A
traveller without a reservation arrived at reception wanting a
room. In any finite hotel, no matter how big, the traveller would
be out of luck – but not in Hilbert’s Hotel.
    ‘No problem, sir,’ said the manager. ‘I’ll ask the person in
Room 1 to move to Room 2, the person in Room 2 to move to
Room 3, the person in Room 3 to move to Room 4, and so on.
The person in Room n will move to Room n þ 1. Then Room 1
will be free, so I’ll put you there.’




*   Part of the appeal of the multiverse approach is that it revives the
    ‘it’s always been here’ point of view. Our universe hasn’t, but the
    surrounding multiverse has. It’s multiverses all the way back . . .
158 // Hilbert’s Hotel




       All move up one, and Room 1 is free.

    This trick works in an infinite hotel. In a finite hotel it goes
wrong, because the person in the room with the biggest number
has nowhere to go. But in Hilbert’s Hotel there is no biggest room
number. Problem sorted.
    Ten minutes later, an Infinity Tours coach arrived, with
infinitely many passengers sitting in seats 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on.
    ‘Well, I can’t fit you in by asking every other guest to move
up some number of places,’ said the manager. ‘Even if they all
moved up a million places, that would only free up a million
rooms.’ He thought for a moment. ‘Nevertheless, I can still fit
you in. I’ll ask the person in Room 1 to move to Room 2, the
person in Room 2 to move to Room 4, the person in Room 3 to
move to Room 6, and so on. The person in Room n will move to
Room 2n. That frees up all the odd-numbered rooms, so now I
can put the person in Seat 1 of your bus into Room 1, the person
in Seat 2 into Room 3, the person in Seat 3 into Room 5, and so
on. The person in Seat n will move to Room 2n  1.’




       How to accommodate an infinite bus-load.

   However, the manager’s troubles were still not over. Ten
minutes later, he was horrified to see infinitely many Transfinity
Travel buses arriving in his (infinite) car park.
                                               Hilbert’s Hotel // 159



     He rushed out to meet them. ‘We’re full – but I can still fit you
all in!’
     ‘How?’ asked the driver of Bus 1.
     ‘I’ll reduce you to a problem I’ve already solved,’ said the
manager. ‘I want you to move everyone into Bus 1.’
     ‘But Bus 1 is full! And there are infinitely many other buses!’
     ‘No problem. Line up all your buses side by side, and
renumber all the seats using a diagonal order.’




       The Manager’s ‘diagonal’ order – the numbers 2–3, 4–5–6,
       7–8–9–10, and so on slant to the left.

    ‘What does that achieve?’ asked the driver.
    ‘Nothing – yet. But notice: each passenger, in each of your
infinitely many buses, is assigned a new number. Every number
occurs exactly once.’
    ‘And your point is—?’
    ‘Move each passenger to the seat in Bus 1 that corresponds to
their new number.’
    The driver did so. Then everyone was sitting in Bus 1, and all
the other buses were empty – so they drove away.
    ‘Now I’ve got a full hotel and just one extra bus-load,’ said


...........................................
the manager. ‘And I already know how to deal with that.’
160 // Continuum Coaches



Continuum Coaches
You won’t be surprised to hear that the Hilbert’s Hotel eventually
ran into an accommodation problem that the manager could not
solve. This time the hotel was completely empty – not that this
ever seemed to make much difference. Then one of Cantor’s
Continuum Coaches stopped at the front door.
    Georg Cantor was the first to sort out the mathematics of
infinite sets. And he discovered something remarkable about the
‘continuum’ – the real number system. A real number is one that
can be written as a decimal, which can either stop after finitely
many digits, like 1.44, or go on for ever, like p. Here’s what
Cantor found.
    The seats of the Continuum Coach were numbered using real
numbers, not positive integers.
    ‘Well,’ the manager thought, ‘one infinity is just like any
other, right?’ So he assigned passengers to rooms, and eventually
the Hotel was full and the lobby was empty. The manager sighed
with relief. ‘Everyone has a room,’ he said to himself.
    Then a forlorn figure came in through the revolving doors.
    ‘Good evening,’ said the manager.
    ‘My name is Mr Diagonal. Geddit? Missed-a-diagonal. You’ve
missed me out, mate.’
    ‘Well, I can always bump everyone up one room—’
    ‘No, mate, you said ‘‘Everyone has a room’’ – I heard you. But
I don’t.’
    ‘Nonsense! You’ve gone to your room, then nipped out the
back and come in the front. I know your kind!’
    ‘No, mate – I can prove I’m not in any of your rooms. Who’s
in Room 1?’
    ‘I can’t reveal personal information about guests.’
    ‘What’s the first decimal place of their coach seat?’
    ‘I suppose I can reveal that. It’s a 2.’
    ‘My first digit is 3. So I’m not the person in Room 1, mate.
Agreed?’
    ‘Agreed.’
                                      A Puzzling Dissection // 161



     ‘What’s the second decimal place of the coach seat of the
person in Room 2?’
     ‘It’s a 7.’
     ‘My second digit is 5. So I’m not the person in Room 2.’
     ‘That makes sense.’
     ‘Yeah, mate, and it goes on doing that. What’s the third
decimal place of the coach seat of the person in Room 3?’
     ‘It’s a 4.’
     ‘My third digit is 8. So I’m not the person in Room 3.’
     ‘Hmm. I think I see where this is headed.’
     ‘Too right, mate. My nth digit is different from the nth digit
of the person in Room n, for every n. So I’m not in Room n. Like I
said, you left me out.’
     ‘And like I said, I can always bump everyone up one place and
fit you in.’
     ‘No use, mate. There’s infinitely many more just like me out
there, sitting in your car park waiting for a room. However you
assign passengers to rooms, there’s going to be someone on the
coach whose nth digit is different from the nth digit of the
person in Room n, for every n. Hordes of them, in fact. You’ll
always miss people out.’
     Now, you understand that Cantor didn’t quite write his proof
in those terms, but that was the basic idea. He proved that the
infinite set of real numbers can’t be matched, one for one, with
the infinite set of whole numbers. Some infinities are bigger than


...........................................
others.



A Puzzling Dissection
‘Why are you hacking that chessboard to bits?’ asked
Innumeratus.
   ‘I want to show you something about areas,’ said Mathophila.
‘What’s the area of the chessboard if each square has area one
square unit?’
   Innumeratus thought about this, and because he was better
162 // A Puzzling Dissection



at maths than his name might suggest, he quickly said, ‘It’s 8
times 8, which is 64 square units.’




                                   How Mathophila cut up
                                   her chessboard . . .


   ‘Excellent!’ said Mathophila. ‘Now, I’m going to rearrange
the four pieces to make a rectangle.’




       . . . and how she rearranged the pieces.

    ‘OK,’ said Innumeratus.
    ‘What’s the area of the rectangle?’
    ‘Er – it must be 64 square units as well! It’s made from the
same pieces.’
    ‘Right . . . but what size is the rectangle?’
    ‘Let me see – 13 by 5.’
    ‘And what is 13 times 5?’
    ‘65,’ replied Innumeratus. He paused. ‘So its area must be 65
square units. That’s strange. The area can’t change when the
pieces are reassembled in a different way . . . ’
    So what’s happened?


...........................................
   Answer on page 286
                                 A Really Puzzling Dissection // 163



A Really Puzzling Dissection
‘The area can’t change when the pieces are reassembled in a
different way.’
    Hmmm.
    In 1924 two Polish mathematicians, Stefan Banach and
Alfred Tarski, proved that it is possible to dissect a sphere into
finitely many pieces, which can then be rearranged to make two
spheres – each the same size as the original. No overlaps, no
missing bits – the pieces fit together perfectly. This result has
become known as the Banach–Tarski paradox, although it’s a
perfectly valid theorem and the only element of paradox is that
it seems to be obviously false.




       It can be done – but not with pieces like these.

      Hang on, though. Surely, if you cut a sphere into several
pieces, the total volume of the pieces must be the same as that of
the sphere. So however you reassemble the pieces, the total
volume can’t change. But two identical spheres have twice the
volume of a single sphere (of the same size). You don’t have to be
a genius to see that it can’t be done! In fact, if it could be done,
then you could start with a gold sphere, cut it up, fit the pieces
back together, and end up with twice as much gold. Then repeat
. . . But you can’t get something for nothing.
      Hang on, though. Let’s not be so hasty.
      The argument about gold is inconclusive, because mathe-
matical concepts do not always model the real world exactly. In
mathematics, volumes can be subdivided into indefinitely small
pieces. In the real world, you hit problems at the atomic scale.
This could spoil things if we try to use gold.
      In contrast, the argument about volumes looks watertight.
But there’s a tiny loophole in the logic: the tacit assumption that
164 // A Really Puzzling Dissection



the separate pieces have well-defined volumes. ‘Volume’ is such a
familiar concept that we tend to forget just how tricky it can be.
    None of this means that Banach and Tarski were right; it just
explains why they are not obviously wrong. Unlike the nice
polygonal pieces in Mathophila’s dissection of a chessboard, the
Banach–Tarski ‘pieces’ are more like disconnected clouds of
infinitely small dust specks than solid lumps. They are so
complicated, in fact, that their volumes cannot be defined – not
if we want them to obey the usual rule ‘when you combine
several pieces, their volumes add’. And if that rule fails, the
argument about volumes comes to bits. The single sphere, and
two copies of it, have well-defined volumes. But the intermediate
stages, when they are cut into pieces, aren’t like that.
    What are they like? Well . . . not like that.
    Banach and Tarski realised that this loophole might actually
make their paradoxical dissection possible. They proved that:

. You can split a single sphere A into finitely many very
   complicated, possibly disconnected, parts.
. You can do the same to two spheres B and C, the same size as A.
. You can accomplish all of that in such a way that the parts of
   B and C together correspond exactly to the parts of A.
. You can arrange for corresponding parts to be perfect copies
   of one another.

The proof of the Banach–Tarski paradox is complicated and
technical, and it requires a set-theoretic assumption known as
the axiom of choice. This particular assumption worries some
mathematicians. However, the fact that it leads to the Banach–
Tarski paradox is not what worries them, and is no reason to
reject it. Why not? Because the Banach–Tarski paradox isn’t
really very paradoxical. With the right intuition, we would
expect such paradoxical dissections to be possible.
    Let me try to give you that intuition. It all hinges on the weird
behaviour of what are called infinite sets. Although a sphere has
finite size, it contains infinitely many points. That leaves room for
the weirdness of infinity to show up in the geometry of the sphere.
                                A Really Puzzling Dissection // 165



       A useful analogy involves the English alphabet, the 26 letters
A, B, C, . . . , Z. These letters can be combined to make words, and
we list permissible words in a dictionary. Suppose we allow all
possible sequences of letters, as long or as short as we like. So
AAAAVDQX is a word, and so is GNU, and so is ZZZ . . . Z with ten
million Z’s. We can’t print such a dictionary, but to mathemat-
icians it is a well-defined set which contains infinitely many words.
       Now, we can dissect this dictionary into 26 pieces. The first
piece contains all words starting with A, the second contains all
words starting with B, and so on, with the 26th piece containing
all words starting with Z. These pieces do not overlap, and every
word occurs in exactly one piece.
       Each piece, however, has exactly the same structure as the
original dictionary. The second piece, for example, contains the
words BAAAAVDQX, BGNU and BZZZ . . . Z. The third contains
CAAAAVDQX, CGNU and CZZZ . . . Z. You can convert each
piece into the entire dictionary by lopping off the first letter from
every word.
       In other words: we can cut the dictionary apart, and
reassemble the pieces to make 26 exact copies of the dictionary.
       Banach and Tarski found a way to do the same kind of thing
with the infinite set of all points in a solid sphere. Their alphabet
consisted of two different rotations of the sphere; their words
were sequences of these rotations. By playing a more compli-
cated version of the dictionary game with the rotations, you can
create an analogous dissection of the sphere. Since there are now
two ‘letters’ in the alphabet, we convert the original sphere into
two identical copies.
       Careful readers will observe that I’ve cheated slightly in the
interests of simplicity. When I chop off the initial letter B from
the second piece, for instance, I not only get the entire original
dictionary: I also get the ‘empty’ word that arises when the initial
B is deleted from the word B. So really my dissection turns the
dictionary into 26 copies of itself, plus 26 extra words A, B, C,
. . . , Z of length 1. To keep everything neat and tidy, we have to
absorb the extra 26 words into the pieces. A similar problem
166 // Nothing Up My Sleeve . . .



occurs in Banach and Tarski’s construction – but this is a very
fine point. If we ignore it, we still double the sphere – we just
have a few extra points left over. Which is just as suprising.
    After Banach and Tarski proved their theorem, mathemat-
icians began to wonder how few pieces you could get away with.
In 1947 Abraham Robinson proved that it can be done with five
pieces, but no fewer. If you are willing to ignore a single point at
the centre of the sphere, this number reduces to four.
    The Banach–Tarski paradox isn’t really about dissecting
spheres. It is about the impossibility of defining a sensible


...........................................
concept of ‘volume’ for really complicated shapes.



Nothing Up My Sleeve . . .
How can you remove a loop of string from your arm without
taking your hand out of your jacket pocket?
    More precisely: take a two-metre length of string and tie its
ends together to form a closed loop. Put on your jacket, button it
up, and put your arm through a loop and into the side pocket.
Now you have to remove the loop without taking your hand out
of your pocket – and without sliding the loop into the pocket to
sneak it out over the ends of your fingers.




                            Remove the string without removing
                            your hand from your pocket.




...........................................
   Answer on page 286
                                         Two Perpendiculars // 167



Nothing Down My Leg . . .
Once your audience has learned to solve the previous problem,
ask someone to try the same thing, still wearing the jacket, but
with his hand in his trouser pocket.


...........................................
   Answer on page 287



Two Perpendiculars
Euclidean geometry is renowned for its logical consistency: no
two theorems contradict each other. Actually, there are errors in
Euclid. Here’s a case in point.
   One of Euclid’s theorems proves that if we have a line, and a
point not on the line, then there is exactly one ‘perpendicular’
from the point to the line. That is, there is a line through the
point that meets the original line at right angles – and there is
only one such line. (If there were two, they would be parallel, so
they couldn’t both pass through the same point.)




       Given AB and X, we can find P such that PX is perpendicular to
       AB. There can’t be another point Q like that, because the line
       through Q is parallel to PX so it can’t pass through X.

    A second Euclidean theorem proves that if you take a circle
and join the two ends of a diameter to a point on the
circumference, you get a right angle.
168 // Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum?




                                      If AB is a diameter of the
                                      circle, angle APB is a right
                                      angle.


   Let’s put these two theorems together and see what happens.




                                      How to find two
                                      perpendiculars.


    Given the line AB and the point X, draw circles with
diameters AX and BX. Let the line AB meet the first circle at P and
the second circle at Q. Then the angle APX is a right angle, since
AX is a diameter of the first circle. Similarly, the angle BQX is a
right angle. So there are two perpendiculars XP and XQ from X to
AB.
    Which of Euclid’s two theorems is wrong?


...........................................
   Answer on page 288



Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum?
The backcloth depicted a striking scene: the Rhine valley by
moonlight. In the pit, the orchestra was rehearsing Wagner’s
Götterdämmerung. The story had reached the tragic death of
Siegfried, and the conductor, Otto Fenderbender, raised his
baton for the beginning of the ‘Funeral March’. First, just
tympani, an intricate repeated rhythm in a low C sharp . . .
                       Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum? // 169



    ‘No, no, no!’ screamed Fenderbender, hurling his baton to
the floor. ‘Not like that, you incompetent pigs!’
    The leading tympanist, somewhat unwisely, protested. ‘But
Herr Fenderbender, the rhythm was absolutely pre—’
    ‘Rhythm, schmythm!’ said Fenderbender.
    ‘The tempo was exactly as the score indic—’
    ‘I am not complaining about the tempo!’ screamed the
conductor.
    ‘The pitch was a perfect C shar—’
    ‘Pitch? Pitch? Of course the pitch was perfect! I heard that for
myself when the orchestra was tuning up! I have an inherent
sense of pitch!’
    ‘Then what—’
    ‘The shape, you fool! The shape!’
    The lead tympanist looked perplexed. It was hard to describe.
Otto tried to express what he had heard. ‘One of the drums
sounded too . . . well, too square,’ he said. ‘The other tympani
had their usual . . . rounded sound, but one of them— well, it had
corners.’
    ‘Come now, Herr Fenderbender – surely you’re not claiming
you can hear the shape of a drum?’
    ‘I heard what I heard,’ Otto said doggedly. ‘One of the drums
is too square.’
    And, what do you know? He was right. It’s the Bessel
functions, you see.




                                                       Some
                                                       vibrational
                                                       modes of a
                                                       circular
                                                       drum.

   Let me explain. When a drum beats, it produces several
170 // Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum?



different notes at once, each note corresponding to a different
mode of vibration. Each has its own frequency, or equivalently,
pitch. Euler calculated the vibrational spectrum of a circular
drum – the list of frequencies of these basic modes – using
mathematical gadgets called Bessel functions. For a square drum
you get sines and cosines instead. In both cases there are
characteristic patterns of nodal lines, where the drum remains
stationary. At any given instant, the drum is displaced upwards
on one side of a nodal line, and downwards on the other. As the
drum vibrates, each region between the nodal lines oscillates up
and down. Fast oscillations create a high-pitched sound, slow
oscillations make the pitch lower.




                                                     Some of the
                                                     modes of a
                                                     square drum.

    The mathematics of vibrations proves that the shape of a
drum determines its list of frequencies – basically, what it can
sound like. But can we go the other way, and deduce the shape
from the sound? In 1966 Mark Kac made that question precise:
given the spectrum, is it possible to find the shape of the drum?
    Kac’s question is much more important than its quirky
formulation might suggest. When an earthquake hits, the entire
Earth rings like a bell, and seismologists deduce a great deal
about the internal structure of our planet from the ‘sound’ that it
produces and the way those sounds echo around as they bounce
off different layers of rock. Kac’s question is the simplest one we
can ask about such techniques. ‘Personally, I believe that one
cannot ‘‘hear’’ the shape,’ Kac wrote. ‘But I may well be wrong
and I am not prepared to bet large sums either way.’
                       Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum? // 171



     The first significant evidence that Kac was right showed up in
a higher-dimensional analogue of the problem. John Milnor
wrote a one-page paper proving that two distinct 16-dimensional
tori (generalised doughnuts, basically) have the same spectrum.
The first results for ordinary 2-dimensional drums were in a more
positive direction: various features of the shape can be deduced
from the spectrum. Kac himself proved that the spectrum of a
drum determines its area and perimeter. A curious consequence
is that you can hear whether or not a drum is circular, because a
circle has the smallest perimeter for a given area. If you know the
area A and the perimeter p, and it so happens that p2 ¼ 4pA – as it
is for a circle – then the drum is a circle, and vice versa. So when
Fenderbender said that tympani should have a nice ‘rounded’
sound, he knew what he was talking about.
     In 1989 Carolyn Gordon, David Webb and Scott Wolpert
answered Kac’s question by constructing two distinct math-
ematical drums that produce an identical range of sounds. Since
then, simpler examples have been found. So now we know that
there are limits to what information can be deduced from a
shape’s vibrational spectrum.




       The first example of two sound-alike drums with different


...........................................
       shapes.
172 // What is e, and Why?



What is e, and Why?
The number e, which is approximately 2.7182, is the ‘base of
natural logarithms’, a term that refers to its historical origins.
One way to see how it arises is to see how a sum of money grows
when compound interest is applied at increasingly fine intervals.
Suppose that you deposit £1 in the Bank of Logarithmania—
    No, no, no. This is the twenty-first century. People don’t
deposit savings in banks, they borrow.
    OK, suppose you borrow £1 on your Logarithmania credit
card. (More likely it would be £4,675.23, but £1 is easier to think
about.) Once the 0% balance transfer deal has lapsed – about a
week after you sign up for the card – the bank applies an interest
rate of 100%, paid annually. Then after one year you will owe
them
       £1:00 borrowed þ £1:00 interest ¼ £2:00 total

If instead you paid 50% interest every six months, compounded
(so that interest becomes payable on previous interest) then after
one year you would owe
       £1:00 invested þ £0:50 interest þ £0:75 interest ¼ £2:25 total

This is ð1 þ 12Þ2 , and the pattern continues like that. So, for
example, if you paid interest of 10% at intervals of one-tenth of a
year, you would end up owing
                  
                1 10
          1þ          ¼ 2:5937
               10

pounds. The Bank likes the way these sums are going, so it
decides to apply the interest rate ever more frequently. If you
paid interest of 1% at intervals of one-hundredth of a year, you
would end up owing
               
              1 100
         1þ         ¼ 2:7048
             100
                                  May Husband and Ay . . . // 173



pounds. If you paid interest of 0.1% at intervals of one-
thousandth of a year, you would end up owing
                 1;000
              1
        1þ               ¼ 2:7169
            1;000

pounds. And so on.
     As the intervals become ever finer, the amount you owe does
not increase without limit. It just seems that way. The amount
owed gets closer and closer to 2.7182 pounds – and this number
is given the symbol e. It’s one of those weird numbers which, like
p, turn up naturally in mathematics but can’t be expressed
exactly as a fraction, so it gets a special symbol. It is especially
important in calculus, and it is widely used in scientific


...........................................
applications.



May Husband and Ay . . .
In a single move, a chess queen can travel any number of squares
in a straight line – horizontally, vertically or diagonally. (Unless
another piece stops her, but we ignore that in this puzzle.)




                                     Move the queen from Q to K,
                                     visiting each square exactly
                                     once and in as few moves as
                                     possible.


    She starts on square Q and wishes to visit the king on square
K. Along the way, she wants to visit all of her other subjects, who
live on the other 62 squares. Just passing through, you appreciate
– she doesn’t stop on every square, but she does has to stop now
and again. How can she visit all the squares and finish at the
174 // Many Knees, Many Seats



king’s square, without passing through any square twice – in the
smallest number of moves?


...........................................
   Answer on page 288



Many Knees, Many Seats
A polyhedron is a solid with finitely many flat (that is, planar)
faces. Faces meet along lines called edges; edges meet at points
called vertices. The climax of Euclid’s Elements is a proof that there
are precisely five regular polyhedrons, meaning that every face is a
regular polygon (equal sides, equal angles), all faces are identical,
and each vertex is surrounded by exactly the same arrangement of
faces. The five regular polyhedrons (also called regular solids) are:

. the tetrahedron, with 4 triangular faces, 4 vertices and 6 edges
. the cube or hexahedron, with 6 square faces, 8 vertices and
   12 edges
. the octahedron, with 8 triangular faces, 6 vertices and 12 edges
. the dodecahedron, with 12 pentagonal faces, 20 vertices and
   30 edges
. the icosahedron, with 20 triangular faces, 12 vertices and
   30 edges.




       The five regular solids.
                                    Many Knees, Many Seats // 175



    The names start with the Greek word for the number of faces,
and ‘hedron’ means ‘face’. Originally it meant ‘seat’, which isn’t
quite the same thing. While we’re discussing linguistics, the
‘-gon’ in ‘polygon’ originally meant ‘knee’ and later acquired the
technical meaning of ‘angle’. So a polygon has many knees, and
a polyhedron has many seats.
    The regular solids arise in nature – in particular, they all occur
in tiny organisms known as radiolarians. The first three also
occur in crystals; the dodecahedron and icosahedron don’t,
although irregular dodecahedra are sometimes found.




       Radiolarians shaped like the regular solids.

    It’s quite easy to make models of polyhedrons out of card, by
cutting out a connected set of faces – called the net of the solid –
folding along edges, and gluing or taping appropriate pairs of
edges together. It helps to add flaps to one edge of each such pair,
as shown.
176 // Many Knees, Many Seats




       Nets of the regular solids.

   Here’s a bit of arcane lore: if the edges are of unit length, then
the volumes of these solids (in cubic units) are:
                  p
.   Tetrahedron: 122 *0:117 851
.   Cube: 1     p
.   Octahedron: 32 *0:471
                     p
                            405
                       5 4
.   Dodecahedron:p 2
                        f  *7:663 12
.   Icosahedron: 65 f2 *2:181 69

Here f is the golden number (page 96), which turns up
whenever you have pentagons around – just as p turns up
whenever you have spheres or circles. And * means ‘approxi-
mately equals’.
    Analogues of the regular polyhedrons can be defined in
spaces of 4 or more dimensions, and are called polytopes. There
are six regular polytopes in 4 dimensions, but only three regular


...........................................
polytopes in 5 dimensions or more.
                                             Euler’s Formula // 177



Euler’s Formula
The regular solids have a curious pattern which turns out to be
far more general. If F is the number of faces, E the number of
edges and V the number of vertices, then
       FEþV ¼2

for all five solids. In fact, the same formula holds for any
polyhedron that has no ‘holes’ in it – one that is topologically
equivalent to a sphere. This relation is called Euler’s formula, and
its generalisations to higher dimensions are important in
topology.
    The formula also applies to a map in the plane, provided we
consider the infinite region outside the map to be an extra face –
or ignore this ‘face’ and replace the formula by
       FEþV ¼1

which amounts to the same thing but is easier to think about. I’ll
call this expression Euler’s formula for maps.
    The diagram shows, using a typical example, why this
formula is true. The value of F  E þ V is written underneath
each step in the process. The method of proof is to simplify the
map, one step at a time. If we choose a face adjacent to the
outside of the map, and remove that face and an adjacent outside
edge, then both F and E decrease by 1. This leaves F  E
unchanged. Since we haven’t altered V, it also leaves F  E þ V
unchanged. We can keep erasing a face and a corresponding edge
until all faces have been removed. We are left with a network of
edges and vertices, and this always forms a ‘tree’ – there are no
closed loops of edges. In the example in the diagram, this stage is
reached at the sixth step, when F  E þ V ¼ 0  7 þ 8.
178 // Euler’s Formula




       Proof of Euler’s formula for maps in the plane.

    Now we simplify the tree by snipping off one ‘branch’ – an
edge on the end of the tree plus the vertex on the outside end of
that edge – at a time. Now F remains at 0, while E and V both
decrease by 1 with each snip. Again, F  E þ V remains
unchanged. Eventually, a single vertex remains. Now
F ¼ 0; E ¼ 0 and V ¼ 1. So at the end of the process,
F  E þ V ¼ 1. Since the process does not change this quantity, it
must also have been equal to 1 when we started.
    The proof explains why the signs alternate – plus, minus, plus
– as we go from faces to edges to vertices. A similar trick works for
higher-dimensional topology, for much the same reason.
    There is a hidden topological assumption in the proof: the
map is drawn in the plane. Equivalently, when considering
polyhedrons, they must be ‘drawable’ on the surface of a sphere.
If the polyhedron or map lives on a surface that is topologically
distinct from a sphere, such as a torus, then the method of proof
can be adapted but the final result is slightly different. For
example, the formula for polyhedrons becomes
       FEþV ¼0

when the polyhedron is topologically equivalent to a torus. As an
example, this ‘picture frame’ polyhedron has F ¼ 16; E ¼ 32 and
V ¼ 16:
                                            What Day is It? // 179




       Picture frame polyhedron.

   On a surface with g holes, the formula becomes
       F  E þ V ¼ 2  2g

so we can calculate the number of holes by drawing a
polyhedron on the surface. In this manner, an ant that inhabited
the surface and could not perceive it ‘from outside’ would still be
able to work out the topology of the surface. Today’s cosmolo-
gists are trying to work out the topological shape of our own
universe – which we can’t observe ‘from outside’ – by using more


...........................................
elaborate topological ideas of a similar kind.



What Day is It?
Yesterday, Dad got confused about which day of the week it was.
‘Whenever we go on holiday, I forget,’ he said.
   ‘Friday,’ said Darren.
   ‘Saturday,’ his twin sister Delia contradicted.
   ‘What day is it tomorrow, then?’ asked Mum, trying to sort
out the dispute without too much stress.
   ‘Monday,’ said Delia.
   ‘Tuesday,’ said Darren.
   ‘Oh, for Heaven’s sake! What day was it yesterday, then?’
   ‘Wednesday,’ said Darren.
   ‘Thursday,’ said Delia.
   ‘Grrrrrrrr!’ said Mum, doing her famous Marge Simpson
180 // Strictly Logical



impression. ‘Each of you has given one correct answer and two
wrong ones.’
   What day is it today?


...........................................
   Answer on page 288



Strictly Logical
Only an elephant or a whale gives birth to a creature that weighs
more than 100 kilograms.
   The President weighs 150 kilograms.
   Therefore . . .
   (I learned this one from the writer and publisher Stefan


...........................................
Themerson.)



Logical or Not?
       If pigs had wings, they’d fly.
       Pigs don’t fly if the weather is bad.
       If pigs had wings, the sensible person would carry an
       umbrella.
       Therefore:
       If the weather is bad, the sensible person would carry an
       umbrella.
       Is the deduction logically valid?


...........................................
   Answer on page 288



A Question of Breeding
Farmer Hogswill went to the village fete, where he met five of his
friends: Percy Catt, Dougal Dogge, Benjamin Hamster, Porky
Pigge and Zoe Zebra. By a remarkable coincidence – which was a
constant source of amusement – each of them was an expert
                                                Fair Shares // 181



breeder of one type of animal: cat, dog, hamster, pig and zebra.
Between them, they bred all five types. None bred an animal that
sounded like their surname.
   ‘Congratulations, Percy!’ said Hogswill. ‘I hear you’ve just
won third prize in the pig-breeding competition!’
   ‘That’s right,’ said Zoe.
   ‘And Benjamin got second for dogs!’
   ‘No,’ said Benjamin. ‘You knows fine well I never touches no
dogs. Nor zebras, neither.’
   Hogswill turned to the person whose surname sounded like
the animals that Zoe bred. ‘And did you win anything?’
   ‘Yes, a gold medal for my prize hamster.’
   Assuming that all statements except the alleged second for
dogs are true, who breeds what?


...........................................
   Answer on page 289



Fair Shares
In 1944, as the Russian army fought to reclaim Poland from the
Germans, the mathematician Hugo Steinhaus, trapped in the
city of Lvov, sought distraction in a puzzle. As you do.
    The puzzle was this. Several people want to share a cake (by
all means replace that by a pizza if you wish). And they want the
procedure to be fair, in the sense that no one will feel that they
have got less than their fair share.
    Steinhaus knew that for two people there is a simple method:
one person cuts the cake into two pieces, and the other chooses
which one they want. The second person can’t complain,
because they made the choice. The first person also can’t
complain – if they do, it was their fault for cutting the cake
wrongly.
    How can three people divide a cake fairly?


...........................................
   Answer on page 289
182 // The Sixth Deadly Sin



The Sixth Deadly Sin
It’s envy, and the problem is to avoid it.
     Stefan Banach and Bronislaw Knaster extended Steinhaus’s
method of fair cake division to any number of people, and
simplified it for three people. Their work pretty much summed
up the whole area until a subtle flaw emerged: the procedure may
be fair, but it takes no account of envy. A method is envy-free if no
one thinks that anyone else has got a bigger share than they
have. Every envy-free method is fair, but a fair method need not
be envy-free. And neither Steinhaus’s method, nor that of
Banach and Knaster, is envy-free.
     For example, Belinda may think that Arthur’s division is fair.
Then Steinhaus’s method stops after step 3, and both Arthur and
Belinda consider all three pieces to be of size 1/3. Charlie must
think that his own piece is at least 1/3, so the allocation is
proportional. But if Charlie sees Arthur’s piece as 1/6 and
Belinda’s as 1/2, then he will envy Belinda, because Belinda got
first crack at a piece that Charlie thinks is bigger than his.
     Can you find an envy-free method for dividing a cake among
three people?


...........................................
   Answer on page 290



Weird Arithmetic
‘No, Henry, you can’t do that,’ said the teacher, pointing to
Henry’s exercise book, where he had written
       1 8 18
        6 ¼
       4 5 45
‘Sorry, sir,’ said Henry. ‘What’s wrong? I checked it on my
calculator and it seemed to work.’
    ‘Well, Henry, the answer is right, I guess,’ the teacher
admitted. ‘Though you should probably cancel the 9’s to get 25,
which is simpler. What’s wrong is—’
                                        McMahon’s Squares // 183



    Explain the mistake to Henry. Then find all such sums, with
single non-zero digits in the first two fractions, that are correct.


...........................................
    Answer on page 291



How Deep is the Well?
In one episode of the television series Time Team, the indefatig-
able archaeologists want to measure the depth of a mediaeval
well. They drop something into it and time its fall, which takes an
amazingly long six seconds. You hear it clattering its way down
for ages. They come dangerously close to calculating the depth
using Newton’s laws of motion, but cop out at the last moment
and use three very long tape measures joined together instead.
    The formula they very nearly state is

        s ¼ 12 gt2

where s is the distance travelled under gravity, falling from rest,
and g is the acceleration due to gravity. It applies when air
resistance can be ignored. This formula was discovered experi-
mentally by Galileo Galilei and later generalised by Isaac Newton
to describe motion under the influence of any force.
     Taking g ¼ 10 m s2 (metres per second per second), how deep
is the well?
     You’ve got three days to do it.


...........................................
    Answer on page 292



McMahon’s Squares
This puzzle was invented by the combinatorialist* P.A.
McMahon in 1921. He was thinking about a square that has been
divided into four triangular regions by diagonals. He wondered
how many different ways there are to colour the various regions,

*   A combinatorialist is someone who invents this kind of thing.
184 // What is the Square Root of Minus One?



using three colours. He discovered that if rotations and
reflections are regarded as the same colouring, there are exactly
24 possibilities. Find them all.
    Now, a 664 rectangle contains 24 161 squares. Can you fit
the 24 squares together to make such a rectangle, so that
adjacent regions have the same colour, and the entire perimeter
of the rectangle has the same colour?


...........................................
   Answer on page 292



What is the Square Root of Minus One?
The square root of a number is a number whose square is the
given one. For instance, the square root of 4 is 2. If we allow
negative numbers, then 2 is a second square root of 4 because
minus times minus makes plus. Since plus times plus also makes
plus, the square of any number – positive or negative – is always
positive. So it looks as though negative numbers, in particular
1, can’t have square roots.
    Despite this, mathematicians (and physicists and engineers
and indeed anyone working in any branch of science) have
found it useful to provide 1 with a square root. This is not a
number in the usual sense, so it is given a new symbol, which is i
if you are a mathematician, and j if you are an engineer.
    Square roots of negative numbers first showed up in
mathematics around 1450, in an algebra problem. In those days
the idea was a huge puzzle, because people thought of a number
as something real. Even negative numbers caused a great deal of
head-scratching, but people quickly got accustomed to them
when they realised how useful they could be. Much the same
happened with i, but it took a lot longer.
    A big issue was how to visualise i geometrically. Everyone had
got used to the idea of the number line, like an infinitely long
ruler, with positive numbers on the right and negative ones on
the left, and fractions and decimals in between:
                    What is the Square Root of Minus One? // 185




                                           The ‘real’ number line.

    Collectively, these familiar kinds of number became known
as real numbers, because they correspond directly to physical
quantities. You can observe 3 cows or 2.73 kilograms of sugar.
    The puzzle was that there seemed to be nowhere on the real
number line for the ‘new’ number i. Eventually, mathematicians
realised that it didn’t have to go on the real number line. In fact,
being a new kind of number, it couldn’t go there. Instead, i had to
live on a second line, at right angles to the real number line:




                                            The ‘imaginary’ number
                                            line, placed at right
                                            angles to the real one.

   And if you added an imaginary number to a real one, the
answer had to live in the plane defined by the two lines:




                                            A complex number is a
                                            real one plus an
                                            imaginary one.
186 // The Most Beautiful Formula



    Multiplication was more complicated. The main point was
that multiplying a number by i rotated it around the origin O
through a right angle, anticlockwise. For instance, 3 multiplied
by i is 3i, and that’s what you get when you rotate the point
labelled 3 through 908.
    The new numbers extended the familiar real number line to a
larger space, a number plane. Three mathematicians discovered
this idea independently: the Norwegian Caspar Wessel, the
Frenchman Jean-Robert Argand and the German Carl Friedrich
Gauss.
    Complex numbers don’t turn up in everyday situations, such
as checking the supermarket bill or measuring someone for a
suit. Their applications are in things like electrical engineering
and aircraft design, which lead to technology that we can use
without having to know the underlying mathematics.


...........................................
    The engineers and designers need to know it, though.



The Most Beautiful Formula
Occasionally people hold polls for the most beautiful mathe-
matical formula of all time – yes, they really do, I’m not making
this up, honest – and nearly always the winner is a famous
formula discovered by Euler, which uses complex numbers to
link the two famous constants e and p. The formula is

       eip ¼ 1

and it is extremely influential in a branch of maths known as


...........................................
complex analysis.



Why is Euler’s Beautiful Formula True?
I often get asked whether there is a simple way to explain why
Euler’s formula eip ¼ 1 is true. It turns out that there is, but
                      Why is Euler’s Beautiful Formula True? // 187



some preparation is needed – about two years of undergraduate
mathematics.
    This is uncomfortably like the joke about the professor who
says in a lecture that some fact is obvious, and when challenged
goes away for half an hour and returns to say ‘yes, it is obvious,’
and then continues lecturing without further explanation. It just
takes two years instead of half an hour. So I’m going to give you
the explanation. Skip this bit if it doesn’t make sense – but it does
illustrate how higher mathematics sometimes gains new insights
by putting different ideas together in unexpected ways. The
necessary ingredients are some geometry, some differential
equations and a bit of complex analysis.
    The main idea is to solve the differential equation
       dz
          ¼ iz
       dt
where z is a complex function of time t, with the initial
condition zð0Þ ¼ 1. It is standard in differential equations courses
that the solution is

       zðtÞ ¼ eit

Indeed, you can define the exponential function ew this way.




                                              Geometry of the
                                              differential equation.


    Now let’s interpret the equation geometrically.
Multiplication by i is the same as rotation through a right angle,
so iz is at right angles to z. Therefore the tangent vector iz(t) to
the solution at any point z(t) is always at right angles to the
188 // Your Call May be Monitored for Training Purposes



‘radius vector’ from 0 to z(t) and has length 1. Therefore the
solution z(t) always lies in the unit circle, and the point z(t)
moves round this circle with angular velocity 1 measured in
radians per second. (The radian measure of an angle is the length
of the arc of the unit circle corresponding to that angle.) The
circumference of the unit circle is 2p, so t ¼ p is halfway round
the circle. But halfway round is visibly the point z ¼ 1.
Therefore eip ¼ 1, which is Euler’s formula.
    All the ingredients of this proof are well known, but the
overall package seems not to get much prominence. Its big
advantage is to explain why circles (leading to p) have anything
to do with exponentials (defined using e). So given the right


...........................................
background, Euler’s formula ceases to be mysterious.



Your Call May be Monitored for Training
Purposes
‘The number you have dialled is imaginary. Please rotate your


...........................................
phone 90 degrees and try again.’



Archimedes, You Old Fraud!
‘Give me a place to stand, and I will move the Earth.’ So,
famously, said Archimedes, dramatising his newly discovered
law of the lever. Which in this case takes the form

       Force exerted by Archimedes
       6distance from Archimedes to fulcrum
        equals
       Mass of Earth6distance from Earth to fulcrum

The fulcrum is the pivot – the black triangle in the picture:
                        Fractals – The Geometry of Nature // 189




                                                    The law of the
                                                    lever.

     Now, I don’t think Archimedes was interested in the position
of the Earth in space, but he did want the fulcrum to be fixed. (I
know he said ‘a place to stand’, but if the fulcrum moves, all bets
are off, so presumably that’s what he meant.) He also needed a
perfectly rigid lever of zero mass, and he probably didn’t realise
that he also needed uniform gravity, contrary to astronomical
fact, to convert mass to weight. No matter. I don’t want to get
into discussions about inertia or other quibbles. Let’s grant him
all those things. My question is: when the Earth moves, how far
does it move? And can Archimedes achieve the same result more
easily?


...........................................
   Answer on page 293



Fractals – The Geometry of Nature
Every so often, an entire new area of mathematics arises. One of
the best known in recent times is fractal geometry, pioneered by
Benoı̂t Mandelbrot, who coined the term ‘fractal’ in 1975.
Roughly speaking, it is a mathematical method for coming to
grips with apparent irregularities in the natural world, and
revealing hidden structure. The subject is best known for its
beautiful, complex computer graphics, but it goes far deeper than
that.
190 // Fractals – The Geometry of Nature




                                                       Part of the
                                                       Mandelbrot
                                                       set, a famous
                                                       fractal.

    The traditional shapes of Euclidean geometry are triangles,
squares, circles, cones, spheres, and the like. These shapes are
simple, and in particular they have no fine structure. If you
magnify a circle, for instance, any portion of it looks more and
more like a featureless straight line. Shapes like this have played a
prominent role in science – for instance, the Earth is close to a
sphere, and for many purposes that level of detail is good
enough.
    Many natural shapes are far more complex. Trees are a mass
of branches, clouds are fuzzy and convoluted, mountains are
jagged, coastlines are wiggly . . . To understand these shapes
mathematically, and to solve problems about them, we need new
ingredients. The supply of problems, by the way, is endless – how
do trees dissipate the energy of the wind, how do waves erode a
coastline, how does water run off mountains into rivers? These
are practical issues, often related to ecology and the environ-
ment, not just theoretical problems.
    Coastlines are a good example. They are wiggly curves, but
you can’t use any old wiggly curve. Coastlines have a curious
property: they look much the same on any scale of map. If the
map shows more detail, extra wiggles can be distinguished. The
exact shape changes, but the ‘texture’ seems pretty much the
same. The jargon here is ‘statistically self-similar’. All statistical
features of a coastline, such as what proportion of bays have a
                         Fractals – The Geometry of Nature // 191



given relative size, are the same no matter what scale of
magnification you work on.
    Mandelbrot introduced the word fractal to describe any shape
that has intricate structure no matter how much you magnify it.
It doesn’t have to be statistically self-similar – but such fractals
are easier to understand. And those that are exactly self-similar
are even nicer, which is how the subject started.
    About a century ago, mathematicians invented a spate of
weird shapes, for various esoteric purposes. These shapes were
not just statistically self-similar – they were exactly self-similar.
When suitably magnified, the result looked identical to the
original. The most famous is the snowflake curve, invented by
Helge von Koch in 1904. It can be assembled from three copies of
the curve shown in the right-hand diagram.




       The snowflake curve and successive stages in its construction.

    This component curve (though not the whole snowflake) is
exactly self-similar. You can see that each stage in the
construction is made from four copies of the previous stage, each
one-third as big. The four copies are fitted together as in Stage 1.
Passing to the infinite limit, we obtain an infinitely intricate
curve that is built from four copies of itself, each one-third the
size – so it is self-similar.
192 // Fractals – The Geometry of Nature




                                              Each quarter of the
                                              curve, blown up to three
                                              times the size, looks like
                                              the original curve.

    This shape is too regular to represent a real coastline, but it
has about the right degree of wiggliness, and less regular curves
formed in a similar way do look like genuine coastlines. The
degree of wiggliness can be represented by a number, called the
fractal dimension.
    To see how this goes, I’m going to take some simpler non-
fractal shapes and see how they fit together at different scales of
magnification. If I break a line into pieces 1/5 the size, say, then I
need 5 of them to reconstruct the line. With a square, I need 25
pieces, which is 52 . And with cubes I need 125, which is 53 .




       Effect of scaling on ‘cubes’ in 1, 2 and 3 dimensions.

    The power of 5 occurring here is the same as the dimension
of the shape concerned: 1 for a line, 2 for a square, 3 for a cube.
In general, if the dimension is d and we have to fit k pieces of size
1/n together to reassemble the original shape, then k ¼ nd .
Taking logarithms, we find that
            log k
       d¼
            log n
                         Fractals – The Geometry of Nature // 193



Now, taking a deep breath, we try this formula out on the
snowflake. Here we need k ¼ 4 pieces each 1/3 the size, so n ¼ 3.
Therefore our formula yields
            log 4
       d¼
            log 3

which is roughly 1.2618. So the ‘dimension’ of the snowflake
curve is not a whole number!
    That would be bad if we wanted to think of ‘dimension’ in
the conventional way, as the number of independent directions
available. But it’s fine if we want a numerical measure of
wiggliness, based on self-similarity. A curve with dimension
1.2618 is more wiggly than a curve of dimension 1, such as a
straight line; but it is less wiggly than a curve of dimension 1.5,
say.
    There are dozens of technically distinct ways to define the
dimension of a fractal. Most of them work when it is not self-
similar. The one used by mathematicians is called the Hausdorff–
Besicovitch dimension. It’s a pig to define and a pig to calculate,
but it has pleasant properties. Physicists generally use a simpler
version, called the box dimension. This is easy to calculate, but
lacks nearly all the pleasant properties of the Hausdorff–
Besicovitch dimension. Despite that, the two dimensions are
often the same. So the term fractal dimension is used to mean
either of them.
    Fractals need not be curves: they can be highly intricate
surfaces or solids, or higher-dimensional shapes. The fractal
dimension then measures how rough the fractal is, and how
effectively it fills space. The fractal dimension turns up in most
applications of fractals, both in the theoretical calculations and
in experimental tests. For example, the fractal dimension of real
coastlines is generally close to 1.25 – surprisingly close to that of
the snowflake curve.
    Fractals have come a long way, and they are now routinely
used as mathematical models throughout the sciences. They are
also the basis of an effective method for compressing computer
194 // Fractals – The Geometry of Nature



files of video images. But their most interesting role is as ‘the’
geometry of many natural forms. A striking example is a kind of
cauliflower called Romanesco broccoli. You can find it in most
supermarkets. Each tiny floret has much the same form as the
whole cauliflower, and everything is arranged in a series of ever-
smaller Fibonacci spirals. This example is the tip of an iceberg –
the fractal structure of plants. While much remains to be sorted
out, it is already clear that the fractal structure arises from the
way plants grow, which in turn is regulated by their genetics. So
the geometry here is more than just a visual pun.




                                                    Romanesco
                                                    broccoli – you
                                                    can’t get much
                                                    more self-
                                                    similar than
                                                    that!

    The applications of fractals are extensive, ranging from the
fine structure of minerals to the form of the entire universe.
Fractal shapes have been used to make antennas for mobile
phones – such shapes are more efficient. Fractal image com-
pression techniques cram huge quantities of data on to CDs and
DVDs. There are even medical applications: for example, fractal
geometry can be used to detect cancerous cells, whose surfaces
are wrinkly and have a higher fractal dimension than normal
cells.
    About ten years ago a team of biologists (Geoffrey West,
James Brown and Brain Enquist) discovered that fractal geometry
can explain a long-standing puzzle about patterns in living
creatures. The patterns concerned are statistical ‘scaling laws’.
For example, the metabolic rates of many animals seem to be
proportional to the 34th power of their masses, and the time it
                          Fractals – The Geometry of Nature // 195



takes for the embryo to develop is proportional to the 14th
power of the mass of the adult. The main enigma here is that
fraction 14. A power law with the value 13 could be explained in
terms of volume, which is proportional to the cube of the
creature’s length. But 14, and related fractions such as 34 or 14, are
harder to explain.
    The team’s idea was an elegant one: a basic constraint on
how organisms can grow is the transport of fluids, such as blood,
around the body. Nature solves this problem by building a
branching network of veins and arteries. Such a network obeys
three basic rules: it should reach all regions of the body, it should
transport fluids using as little energy as possible, and its smallest
tubes should all be much the same size (because the tube can’t be
smaller than a single blood cell, or the blood can’t flow). What
shapes satisfy these conditions? Space-filling fractals – with the
fine structure cut off at the limiting size, that of the single cell.
This approach – which takes into account some important
physical and biological details, such as the flexibility of the tubes
and the occurrence of pulses in the blood as the heart beats –
predicts that elusive 14th power.




                                                        Fractal
                                                        branching of
                                                        blood vessels
                                                        in the lungs.

...........................................
196 // The Missing Symbol



The Missing Symbol
Place a standard mathematical symbol between 4 and 5 to get a
number greater than 4 and less than 5.


...........................................
   Answer on page 294



Where There’s a Wall, There’s a Way
In the county of Hexshire, fields are separated by walls built from
the local stones – which for some reason are all made from
identical hexagonal lumps joined together. Perhaps they origi-
nated as basalt columns like the ones in the Giant’s Causeway.
Anyway, Farmer Hogswill has seven stones, each formed from
four hexagons. In fact, they are precisely the seven possible
combinations of four hexagons:




                                                    Seven stones
                                                    to make a wall.


   He has to make a wall shaped like this:




                                                    The required
                                                    wall.

   How can he do it? (He can rotate the stones and turn them
over to obtain their mirror images if necessary.)


...........................................
   Answer on page 294
                                         Richard’s Paradox // 197



Constants to 50 Places
       p     3.141 592 653 589 793 238 462 643 383 279 502 884
             197 169 399 375 11
       e     2.718 281 828 459 045 235 360 287 471 352 662 497
             757 247 093 699 96
       p
         2   1.414 213 562 373 095 048 801 688 724 209 698 078
             569 671 875 376 95
       p
         3   1.732 050 807 568 877 293 527 446 341 505 872 366
             942 805 253 810 38
       log 2 0.693 147 180 559 945 309 417 232 121 458 176 568
             075 500 134 360 26
       f     1.618 033 988 749 894 848 204 586 834 365 638 117
             720 309 179 805 76
       g     0.577 215 664 901 532 860 606 512 090 082 402 431
             042 159 335 939 94
       d     4.669 201 609 102 990 671 853 203 820 466 201 617
             258 185 577 475 76
   Here f is the golden number (page 96), g is Euler’s constant
(page 96), and d is the Feigenbaum constant, which is important in
chaos theory (page 117). See
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logistic_map


...........................................
mathworld.wolfram.com/FeigenbaumConstant.html



Richard’s Paradox
In 1905 Jules Richard, a French logician, invented a very curious
paradox. In the English language, some sentences define positive
integers and others do not. For example ‘The year of the
Declaration of Independence’ defines 1776, whereas ‘The
historical significance of the Declaration of Independence’ does
not define a number. So what about this sentence: ‘The smallest
number that cannot be defined by a sentence in the English
language containing fewer than 20 words.’ Observe that what-
198 // Richard’s Paradox



ever this number may be, we have just defined it using a sentence
in the English language containing only 19 words. Oops.
     A plausible way out is to say that the proposed sentence does
not actually define a specific number. However, it ought to. The
English language contains a finite number of words, so the
number of sentences with fewer than 20 words is itself finite. Of
course, many of these sentences make no sense, and many of
those that do make sense don’t define a positive integer – but
that just means that we have fewer sentences to consider.
Between them, they define a finite set of positive integers, and it
is a standard theorem of mathematics that in such circumstances
there is a unique smallest positive integer that is not in the set. So
on the face of it, the sentence does define a specific positive
integer.
     But logically, it can’t.
     Possible ambiguities of definition such as ‘A number which
when multiplied by zero gives zero’ don’t let us off the logical
hook. If a sentence is ambiguous, then we rule it out, because an
ambiguous sentence doesn’t define anything. Is the troublesome
sentence ambiguous, then? Uniqueness is not the issue: there
can’t be two distinct smallest-numbers-not-definable-(etc.),
because one must be smaller than the other.
     One possible escape route involves how we decide which
sentences do or do not define a positive integer. For instance, if
we go through them in some kind of order, excluding bad ones
in turn, then the sentences that survive depend on the order in
which they are considered. Suppose that two consecutive
sentences are:

(1) The number in the next valid sentence plus one.

(2) The number in the previous valid sentence plus two.

These sentences cannot both be valid – they would then
contradict each other. But once we have excluded one of them,
the other one is valid, because it now refers to a different
sentence altogether.
                                 Are Hard Problems Easy? // 199



    Forbidding this type of sentence puts us on a slippery slope,
with more and more sentences being excluded for various
reasons. All of which strongly suggests that the alleged sentence
does not, in fact, define a specific number – even though it seems


...........................................
to.



Connecting Utilities
Three houses have to be connected to three utility companies –
water, gas and electricity. Each house must be connected to all
three utilities. Can you do this without the connections crossing?
    (Work ‘in the plane’ – there is no third dimension in which
pipes can be passed over or under cables. And you are not
allowed to route cables or pipes through a house or a utility
company building.)




                                            Connect houses to
                                            utilities with no
                                            crossings.



...........................................
   Answer on page 294



Are Hard Problems Easy?
  or
How to Win a Million Dollars by Proving the
Obvious
Naturally, it’s not that obvious. TANSTAAFL, as science fiction
author Robert A. Heinlein used to say – There Ain’t No Such
Thing As A Free Lunch. But we can all dream.
   I’m referring here to one of the seven Millennium Prize
200 // Are Hard Problems Easy?



Problems (page 127), whose solution will leave some lucky
person a million dollars better off. Technically, it is known as
‘P¼NP?’ which is a pretty silly name. But what it’s about is of
vital importance: inherent limits to the efficiency of computers.
     Computers solve problems by running programs, which are
lists of instructions. A program that always stops with the right
answer (assuming that the computer is doing what its designers
think it should) is called an ‘algorithm’. The name honours the
Arabic mathematician Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Musa al-
Khwarizmi, who lived around AD 800 in present-day Iraq. His
book Hisab al-jabr w’al-muqabala gave us the word ‘algebra’, and
it consists of a series of procedures – algorithms – for solving
algebraic equations of various kinds.
     An algorithm is a method for solving a specific type of
problem, but it is useless in practice unless it delivers the answer
reasonably quickly. The theoretical issue here is not how fast the
computer is, but how many calculations the algorithm has to
perform. Even for a specific problem – to find the shortest route
that visits a number of cities in turn, say – the number of
calculations depends on how complicated the question is. If
there are more cities to visit, the computer will have to do more
work to find an answer.
     For these reasons, a good way to measure the efficiency of an
algorithm is to work out how many computational steps it takes
to solve a problem of a given size. There is a natural division into
‘easy’ calculations, where the size of the calculation is some fixed
power of the input data, and ‘hard’ ones, where the growth rate
is much faster, often exponential. Multiplying two n-digit
numbers together, for example, can be done in about n2 steps
using good old-fashioned long multiplication, so this calculation
is ‘easy’. Finding the prime factors of an n-digit number, on the
other hand, takes about 3n steps if you try every possible divisor
up to the square root of n, which is the most obvious approach,
so this calculation is ‘hard’. The algorithms concerned are said to
run in polynomial time (class P) and non-polynomial time (not-P),
respectively.
                                  Are Hard Problems Easy? // 201



     Working out how quickly a given algorithm runs is relatively
straightforward. The hard bit is to decide whether some other
algorithm might be faster. The hardest of all is to show that what
you’ve got is the fastest algorithm that will work, and basically
we don’t know how to do that. So problems that we think are
hard might turn out to be easy if we found a better method for
solving them, and this is where the million dollars comes in. It
will go to whoever manages to prove that some specific problem
is unavoidably hard – that no polynomial-time algorithm exists
to solve it. Or, just possibly, to whoever proves that There Ain’t
No Such Thing As A Hard Problem – though that doesn’t seem
likely, the universe being what it is.
     Before you rush out to get started, though, there are a couple
of things you should bear in mind. The first is that there is a
‘trivial’ type of problem that is automatically hard, simply
because the size of the output is gigantic. ‘List all ways to
rearrange the first n numbers’ is a good example. However fast
the algorithm might be, it takes at least n! steps to print out the
answer. So this kind of problem has to be removed from
consideration, and this is done using the concept of a non-
deterministic polynomial time, or NP, problem. (Note that NP is
different from not-P.) These are the problems where you can
verify a proposed answer in polynomial time – that is, easily.
     My favourite example of an NP problem is solving a jigsaw
puzzle. It may be very hard to find a solution, but if someone
shows you an allegedly completed puzzle you can tell instantly
whether they’ve done it right. A more mathematical example is
finding a factor of a number: it is much easier to divide out and
see whether some number works than it is to find that number in
the first place.
     The P¼NP? problem asks whether every NP problem is P.
That is, if you can check a proposed answer easily, can you find it
easily? Experience suggests very strongly that the answer should
be ‘no’ – the hard part is to find the answer. But, amazingly, no
one knows how to prove that, or even whether it’s correct. And
that’s why you can pocket a million bucks for proving that P is
202 // Don’t Get the Goat



different from NP, or indeed for proving that, on the contrary,
the two are equal.
    As a final twist, it turns out that all likely candidates to show
that P 6¼ NP are in some sense equivalent. A problem is called NP-
complete if a polynomial-time algorithm to solve that particular
problem automatically leads to a polynomial-time algorithm to
solve any NP problem. Almost any reasonable candidate for
proving that P 6¼ NP is known to be NP-complete. The nasty
consequence of this fact is that no particular candidate is likely
to be more approachable than any of the others – they all live or
die together. In short: we know why P¼NP? must be a very hard
problem, but that doesn’t help us to solve it.


...........................................
    I suspect that there are far easier ways to make a million.



Don’t Get the Goat
There used to be an American game show, hosted by Monty Hall,
in which the guest had to choose one of three doors. Behind one
was an expensive prize – a sports car, say. Behind the other two
were booby prizes – goats.
     After the contestant had chosen, Hall would open one of the
other doors to reveal a goat. (With two doors to choose from, he
could always do this – he knew where the car was.) He would
then offer the contestant the chance to change their mind and
choose the other unopened door.
     Hardly anyone took this opportunity – perhaps with good
reason, as I’ll eventually explain. But for the moment let’s take
the problem at face value, and assume that the car has equal
probability (one in three) of being behind any given door. We’ll
assume also that everyone knows ahead of time that Hall always
offers the contestant a chance to change their mind, after
revealing a goat. Should they change?
     The argument against goes like this: the two remaining doors
are equally likely to conceal a car or a goat. Since the odds are
fifty–fifty, there’s no reason to change.
                                    All Triangles are Isosceles // 203



   Or is there?


...........................................
   Answer on page 296



All Triangles are Isosceles
This puzzle requires some knowledge of Euclidean geometry,
which nowadays isn’t taught . . . Ho hum. It’s still accessible if
you’re prepared to take a few facts on trust.
    An isosceles triangle has two sides equal. (The third could also
be equal: this makes the triangle equilateral, but it still counts as
isosceles too.) Since it is easy to draw triangles with all three sides
different, the title of this section is clearly false. Nevertheless,
here is a geometric proof that it is true.




                                            This triangle is isosceles –
                                            except that it clearly isn’t.




(1) Take any triangle ABC.

(2) Draw a line CX that cuts the top angle in half, so that angles a
and b are equal. Draw a line MX at right angles to the bottom
edge at its midpoint, so that AM = MB. This meets the previous
line, CX, somewhere inside the triangle at the point X.

(3) Draw lines from X to the other two corners A and B. Draw XD
and XE to make angles c, d, e and f all right angles.

(4) Triangles CXD and CXE are congruent – that is, they have the
same shape and size (though one is the other flipped over). The
204 // Square Year



reason is that angles a and b are equal, angles c and d are equal,
and the side CX is common to both triangles.

(5)    Therefore lines CD and CE are equal.

(6)    So are lines XD and XE.

(7) Since M is the midpoint of AB and MX is at right angles to
AB, the lines XA and XB are equal.

(8) But now triangles XDA and XEB are congruent. The reason is
that XD = XE, XA = XB and angle e equals angle f.

(9)    Therefore DA = EB.

(10) Combining steps 5 and 9: CA ¼ CD þ DA ¼ CE þ EB ¼ CB.
So lines CA and CB are equal, and triangle ABC is isosceles.

What’s wrong here? (Hint: it’s not the use of congruent triangles.)


...........................................
      Answer on page 298



Square Year
It was midnight on 31 December 2001, and Alfie and Betty – both
of whom were aged less than sixty – were talking about the
calendar.
    ‘At some time in the past, the year was the square of my
father’s age,’ said Betty proudly. ‘He died at the age of a
hundred!’
    ‘And at some time in the future, the year will be the square of
my age,’ Alfie replied. ‘I don’t know whether I’ll reach a hundred,
though.’
    In which years were Betty’s father and Alfie born?


...........................................
      Answer on page 298
                                         Gödel’s Theorems // 205



Gödel’s Theorems
In 1931 the mathematical logician Kurt Gödel proved two
important theorems, of great originality, which placed un-
avoidable limits on the power of formal reasoning in mathe-
matics. Gödel was responding to a research programme initiated
by David Hilbert, who was convinced that the whole of
mathematics could be placed on an axiomatic basis. Which is to
say it should be possible to state a list of basic assumptions, or
‘axioms’, and deduce the rest of mathematics from the axioms.
Additionally, Hilbert expected to be able to prove two key
properties:

. The system is logically consistent – it is not possible to deduce
   two statements that contradict each other.
. The system is complete – every statement has either a proof or
   a disproof.

The kind of axiomatic ‘system’ that Hilbert had in mind was
more basic than, say, arithmetic – something like the theory of
sets introduced by Georg Cantor in 1879 and developed over the
next few years. Starting from sets, there are ways to define whole
numbers, the usual operations of arithmetic, negative and
rational numbers, real numbers, complex numbers, and so on. So
placing set theory on an axiomatic basis would automatically do
the same for the rest of mathematics. And proving that the
axiomatic system for set theory is consistent and complete would
also do the same for the rest of mathematics. Since set theory is
conceptually simpler than arithmetic, this seemed a sensible way
to proceed. In fact, there was even a candidate axiomatisation of
set theory, developed by Betrand Russell and Alfred North
Whitehead in their three-volume epic Principia Mathematica.
There were various alternatives, too.
    Hilbert pushed a substantial part of his programme through
successfully, but there were still some gaps when Gödel arrived
on the scene. Gödel’s 1931 paper ‘On Formally Undecidable
Propositions in Principia Mathematica and Related Systems I’ left
206 // Gödel’s Theorems



Hilbert’s programme in ruins, by proving that no such approach
could ever succeed.
    Gödel went to great lengths to place his proofs in a rigorous
logical context, and to avoid several subtle logical traps. In fact
most of his paper is devoted to setting up these background
ideas, which are very technical – ‘recursively enumerable sets’.
The climax to the paper can be stated informally, as two
dramatic theorems:

. In a formal system that is rich enough to include arithmetic,
    there exist undecidable statements – statements that can
    neither be proved nor disproved within that system.
.   If a formal system that is rich enough to include arithmetic is
    logically consistent, then it is impossible to prove its
    consistency within that system.

The first theorem does not just indicate that finding a proof or
disproof of the appropriate statement is difficult. It established
that no proof exists, and no disproof exists. It means that the
logical distinction between ‘true’ and ‘false’ is not identical to
that between ‘provable’ and ‘disprovable’. In conventional logic
– including that used in Principia Mathematica – every statement
is either true or false, and cannot be both. Since the negation
not-P of any true statement P is false, and the negation of a false
statement is true, conventional logic obeys the ‘law of the
excluded middle’: given any statement P, then exactly one of P
and not-P is true, and the other is false. Either 2þ2 is equal to 4,
or 2þ2 is not equal to 4. It has to be one or the other, and it can’t
be both.
    Now, if P has a proof, then P must be true – this is how
mathematicians establish the truth (in a mathematical sense) of
their theorems. If P has a disproof, then not-P must be true, so P
must be false. But Gödel proved that for some statements P,
neither P nor not-P has a proof. So a statement can be provable,
disprovable – or neither. If it’s neither, it is said to be
‘undecidable’. So now there is a third possibility, and the
‘middle’ is no longer excluded.
                                          Gödel’s Theorems // 207



    Before Gödel, mathematicians had happily assumed that
anything true was provable, and anything false was disprovable.
Finding the proof or disproof might be very hard, but there was
no reason to doubt that one or the other must exist. So
mathematicians considered ‘provable’ to be the same as ‘true’,
and ‘disprovable’ to be the same as ‘false’. And they felt happier
with practical concepts of proof and disproof than with deep and
tricky philosophical concepts like truth and falsity, so mostly
they settled for proofs and disproofs. And so it was disturbing to
discover that these left a gap, a kind of logical no-man’s-land.
And in ordinary arithmetic, too!
    Gödel set up his undecidable statement by finding a formal
version of the logical paradox ‘this statement is false’, or more
accurately of ‘this statement has no proof’. However, in
mathematical logic a statement is not permitted to refer to itself
– in fact, ‘this statement’ is not something that has a meaning
within the formal system concerned. Gödel found a cunning way
to achieve much the same result without breaking the rules, by
associating a numerical code with each formal statement. Then a
proof of any statement corresponded to some sequence of
transformations of the corresponding code number. So the
formal system could model arithmetic – but arithmetic could
also model the formal system.
    Within this set-up, and assuming the formal system to be
logically consistent, the statement P whose interpretation was
basically ‘this statement has no proof’ must be undecidable. If P
has a proof, then P is true, so by its defining property P has no
proof – a contradiction. But the system is assumed to be
consistent, so that can’t happen. On the other hand, if P has no
proof, then P is true. Therefore not-P has no proof. So neither P
nor not-P has a proof.
    From here it is a short step to the second theorem – if the
formal system is consistent, then there can’t be a proof that it is.
I’ve always thought this to be rather plausible. Think of
arithmetic as a used car salesman. Hilbert wanted to ask the
salesman ‘are you honest?’ and get an answer that guaranteed
208 // If p isn’t a Fraction, How Can You Calculate It?



that he was. Gödel basically argued that if you ask him this
question and he says ‘Yes, I am,’ that is no guarantee of honesty.
Would you believe that someone is telling the truth because they
tell you they are? A court of law certainly would not.
     Because of the technical complications, Gödel proved his
theorems within one specific formal system for arithmetic, the
one in Principia Mathematica. So a possible consequence might
have been that this system is inadequate, and something better is
needed. But Gödel pointed out in the introduction to his paper
that a similar line of reasoning would apply to any alternative
formal system for arithmetic. Changing the axioms wouldn’t
help. His successors filled in the necessary details, and Hilbert’s
programme was a dead duck.
     Several important mathematical problems are now known to
be undecidable. The most famous is probably the halting
problem for Turing machines – which in effect asks for a method
to determine in advance whether a computer program will
eventually stop with an answer, or go on for ever. Alan Turing
proved that some programs are undecidable – there is no way to


...........................................
prove that they stop, and no way to prove that they don’t.



If p isn’t a Fraction, How Can You Calculate It?
The school value 22/7 for p is not exact. It’s not even terribly
good. But it is good for something so simple. Since we know that
p is not an exact fraction, it’s not obvious how it can be
calculated to very high accuracy. Mathematicians achieve this
using a variety of cunning formulas for p, all of which are exact,
and all of which involve some process that goes on for ever. By
stopping before we get to ‘for ever’, a good approximation to p
can be found.
    In fact, mathematics presents us with an embarrassment of
riches, because one of the perennial fascinations of p is its
tendency to appear in a huge variety of beautiful formulas.
Typically they are infinite series, infinite products or infinite
               If p isn’t a Fraction, How Can You Calculate It? // 209



fractions (indicated by the dots . . . ) – which should not be a
surprise since there is no simple finite expression for p, unless you
cheat with integral calculus. Here are a few of the high points.
    The first formula was one of the earliest expressions for p,
discovered by François Viète in 1593. It is related to polygons
with 2n sides:
                                      vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
            rﬃﬃ sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                            rﬃﬃ u     u
                                                  sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                                                   rﬃﬃ
        2      1    1 1 1 t1 1 1 1 1
          ¼      6    þ             6     þ                þ               6...
        p      2    2 2 2              2 2 2 2 2

The next was found by John Wallis in 1655:
        p 2 2 4 4 6 6 8 8
         ¼ 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6...
        2 1 3 3 5 5 7 7 9
Around 1675, James Gregory and Gottfried Leibniz both
discovered
        p      1 1 1 1 1  1
          ¼ 1  þ  þ  þ  ...
        4      3 5 7 9 11 13
This converges too slowly to be of any help in calculating p; that
is, a good approximation requires oodles of terms. But closely
related series were used to find several hundred digits of p in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In the seventeenth cen-
tury, Lord Brouncker discovered an infinite ‘continued fraction’:
                         4
        p¼
                             12
             1þ
                                  32
                  2þ
                                       52
                       2þ
                                     72
                             2þ
                                   2 þ ...
and Euler discovered a pile of formulas like these:
                  1   1   1   1   1
         p2 ¼ 1 þ   þ þ þ þ þ ...
                 22 32 42 52 62
         p3       1   1   1   1    1
            ¼ 1  3 þ 3  3 þ 3  3 þ ...
         32      3   3   7   9   11
         p4       1   1   1   1   1
            ¼ 1 þ 4 þ 4 þ 4 þ 4 þ 4 þ ...
         90      2   3   4   5   6
210 // If p isn’t a Fraction, How Can You Calculate It?



(By the way, there seems to be no such formula for
            1  1  1  1  1
       1þ     þ þ þ þ þ ...
            23 33 43 53 63
which is very mysterious and not fully understood. In particular,
this sum is not any simple rational number times p3 . We do
know that the sum of the series is irrational.)
    For the other formulas, we’ll need the ‘sigma notation’ for
sums. The idea is that: we can write the series for p2 =6 in the
more compact form

       p2 X ?
               1
         ¼       2
       6   n¼1
               n

Let me unpack this. The fancy S symbol is Greek capital sigma, for
‘sum’, and it tells you to add together all the numbers to its right,
namely 1=n2 . The ‘n ¼ 1’ below the S says that we start adding
from n ¼ 1, and by convention n runs through the positive
integers. The symbol ? over the S which means ‘infinity’, tells us
to keep adding these numbers for ever. So this is the same series
for p2 =6 that we saw earlier, but written as an instruction ‘Add the
terms 1=n2 , for n ¼ 1; 2; 3, and so on, going on for ever.’
    Around 1985, Jonathan and Peter Borwein discovered the series
               pﬃﬃ ?
         1    2 2 X    ð4nÞ! 1;103 þ 26;390n
           ¼                 6
         p 9;801 n¼0 ðn!Þ4         ð4699Þ4n

which converges extremely rapidly. In 1997 David Bailey, Peter
Borwein and Simon Plouffe found an unprecedented formula,
          X?                                     n
                  4        2        1        1     1
      p¼                      –        –
          n¼0
               8n þ 1   8n þ 4   8n þ 5   8n þ 6   16

Why is this so special? It allows us to calculate a specific digit of p
without calculating the preceding digits. The only snag is that
these are not decimal digits: they are hexadecimal (base 16), from
which we can also work out a given digit in base 8 (octal), 4
(quaternary) or 2 (binary). In 1998 Fabrice Ballard used this
formula to show that the 100 billionth hexadecimal digit of p
                                                Infinite Wealth // 211



is 9. Within two years, the record had risen to 250 trillion
hexadecimal digits (one quadrillion binary digits).
    The current record for decimal digits of p is held by Yasumasa
Kanada and coworkers, who computed the first 1.2411 trillion


...........................................
digits in 2002.



Infinite Wealth
During the early development of probability theory, a lot of
effort was expended – mainly by various members of the
Bernoulli family, which had four generations of able mathemat-
icians – on a strange puzzle, the St Petersburg paradox.
    You play against the bank, tossing a coin until it first lands
heads. The longer you keep tossing tails, the more the bank will
pay out. In fact, if you toss heads on the first try, the bank pays you
£2. If you first toss heads on the second try, the bank pays you £4. If
you first toss heads on the third try, the bank pays you £8. In
general, if you first toss heads on the nth try, the bank pays you £2n .
    The question is: how much should you be willing to pay to
take part in the game?
    To answer this, you should calculate your ‘expected’
winnings, in the long run, and the rules of probability tell you
how. The probability of a head on the first toss is 12, and you then
win £1, so the expected gain on the first toss is 12 62 ¼ 1. The
probability of a head first arising on the second toss is 14, and you
then win £4, so the expected gain on the second toss is 14 64 ¼ 1.
Continuing in this way, the expected gain on the nth toss is
2 n62n ¼ 1. In total, your expected winnings amount to
1


       1 þ 1 þ 1 þ 1 þ ...

going on forever, which is infinite. Therefore you should pay the
bank an infinite amount to play the game.
       What—if anything—is wrong here?


...........................................
   Answer on page 299
212 // Let Fate Decide



Let Fate Decide
Two university mathematics students are trying to decide how to
spend their evening.
    ‘We’ll toss a coin,’ says the first. ‘If it’s heads, we’ll go to the
pub for a beer.’
    ‘Great!’ says the second. ‘If it’s tails, we’ll go to the movies.’
    ‘Exactly. And if it lands on its edge, we’ll study.’
    Comment: Twice in my life I have witnessed a coin land on its
edge. Once was when I was seventeen, playing a game with some
friends, and the coin landed in a groove in the table. The second
was in 1997, when I gave the Royal Institution Christmas
Lectures on BBC Television. We made a large coin from
polystyrene, and a young lady from the audience tossed it in a
frying-pan like a pancake. The first time she did so, the coin
landed stably on its edge.


...........................................
    Admittedly, it was a rather thick coin.



How Many—
Different sets of bridge hands are there?
       53;644;737;765;488;792;839;237;440;000

if you distinguish hands according to who (N, S, E, W) holds
them. If not, divide by 8 (the N–S and E–W pairing has to be
maintained) to get
       6;705;592;220;686;099;104;904;680;000

Protons are there in the universe according to Sir Arthur Stanley
Eddington?

        13662256 ¼15;747;724;136;275;002;577;605;653;961;181;
                  555;468;044;717;914;527;116;709;366;231;425;
                  076;185;631;031;296
                                               How Many— // 213



Ways are there to rearrange the first 100 numbers?

       93;326;215;443;944;152;681;699;238;856;266;700;490;715;
       968;264;381;621;468;592;963;895;217;599;993;229;915;608;
       941;463;976;156;518;286;253;697;920;827;223;758;251;185;
       210;916;864;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000

unless you argue that ‘rearrange’ excludes the usual ordering
1; 2; 3; . . .; 100: If so, the number is

       93;326;215;443;944;152;681;699;238;856;266;700;490;715;
       968;264;381;621;468;592;963;895;217;599;993;229;915;608;
       941;463;976;156;518;286;253;697;920;827;223;758;251;185;
       210;916;863;999;999;999;999;999;999;999;999

Zeros are there in a googol?
       100

Googol is a name invented in 1920 by Milton Sirotta (aged 9),
nephew of American mathematician Edward Kasner, who
popularised the term in his book Mathematics and the
Imagination. It is equal to 10100 , which is 1 followed by one
hundred zeros:

       10;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;
       000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;000;
       000;000;000;000;000;000

Zeros are there in a googolplex?

       10100
                                                     100
Googolplex is another invented name, equal to 1010 , which is 1
followed by 10100 zeros. The universe is too small to write it down
in full, and the lifetime of the universe is too short anyway.
Unless our universe is part of a much larger multiverse, and even


...........................................
then it’s hard to see why anyone would bother.
214 // What Shape is a Rainbow?



What Shape is a Rainbow?




                                                       Why?

     We all remember being told what causes rainbows. Sunlight
bounces around inside raindrops, which split the white light into
its component colours. Whenever you look directly at a rainbow,
the Sun will be behind you, and the rain will be falling in front of
you. And to knock it on the head, the teacher showed us how a
glass prism splits a ray of white light into all the colours of the
rainbow.
     A neat piece of misdirection, worthy of a conjurer. That
explains the colours. But what about the shape?
     If it’s just a matter of light reflecting back from raindrops,
why don’t we see the colours wherever the rain is coming down?
And if that were happening, wouldn’t the colours fuzz out back
to white, or maybe a muddy grey? Why is the rainbow a series of
coloured arcs? And what shape are the arcs?


...........................................
   Answers on page 300



Alien Abduction
Two aliens from the planet Porqupyne want to abduct two
Earthlings, but are blissfully unaware that the objects of their
                                   The Riemann Hypothesis // 215



attention are actually pigs. In their formal way, the aliens play a
game.




                                             First catch your pig . . .

    On the first move, each alien moves one square horizontally
or vertically (not diagonally). Each alien can move in any of the
four directions, independently of what the other one does. On
the next move, the pigs can do likewise. The aliens get to abduct
any pig upon whose square they land. To their surprise, the pigs
always seem to get away. What are the aliens doing wrong?


...........................................
   Answers on page 302



The Riemann Hypothesis
If there is one single problem that mathematicians would dearly
love to solve, it is the Riemann Hypothesis. Entire areas of
mathematics would open up if some bright spark could prove
this wonderful theorem. And entire areas of mathematics would
close down if some bright spark could disprove it. Right now,
those areas are in limbo. We can get a glimpse of the Promised
Land, but for all we know it might be a mirage.
    Oh, there’s also a million-dollar prize on offer from the Clay
Mathematics Institute.
    The story goes back to the time of Gauss, around 1800, and
the discovery that although the prime numbers seem rather
randomly distributed doing the number line, they have clear
statistical regularities. Various mathematicians noticed that the
number of primes up to some number x, denoted by pðxÞ just to
216 // The Riemann Hypothesis



confuse everyone who thought that p ¼ 3:141 59, is approxi-
mately
                  x
       pðxÞ ¼
                log x

Gauss found what seemed to be a slightly better approximation,
the logarithmic integral
               Z x
                     dx
       LiðxÞ ¼
                 2 log x

Now, it’s one thing to notice this ‘prime number theorem’, but
what counts is proving it, and that turned out to be hard. The
most powerful approach is to turn the question into something
quite different, in this case complex analysis. The connection
between primes and complex functions is not at all obvious, but
the key idea was spotted by Euler.
   Every positive integer is a product of primes in a unique way.
We can formulate this basic property analytically. A first attempt
would be to notice that

       ð1 þ 2 þ 22 þ 23 þ . . .Þ6ð1 þ 3 þ 32 þ 33 þ . . .Þ
       6ð1 þ 5 þ 52 þ 53 þ . . .Þ6 . . .

with each bracketed series going on for ever, and taking the
product over all primes, is equal to
       1 þ 2 þ 3 þ 4 þ 5 þ 6 þ 7 þ 8 þ ...

summed over all integers. For example, to find out where a
number like 360 comes from, we write it as a product of primes

       360 ¼ 23 632 65

and then pick out from the formula the corresponding terms,
here shown in bold:

       ð1 þ 2 þ 22 þ 23 þ . . .Þ6ð1 þ 3 þ 32 þ 33 þ . . .Þ
       6ð1 þ 5 þ 52 þ 53 þ . . .Þ6 . . .

When you ‘expand’ the brackets, each possible product of prime
powers occurs exactly once.
                                     The Riemann Hypothesis // 217



    Unfortunately this makes no sense because the series diverge
to infinity, and so does the product. However, if we replace each
number n by a suitable power ns , and make s large enough,
everything converges. (The minus sign ensures that large values
of s lead to convergence, which is more convenient.) So we get
the formula

       ð1 þ 2s þ 22s þ 23s þ . . .Þ6ð1 þ 3s þ 32s þ 33s þ . . .Þ
       6ð1 þ 5s þ 52s þ 53s þ . . .Þ6 . . .
       ¼ 1 þ 2s þ 3s þ 4s þ 5s þ 6s þ 7s þ 8s þ . . .

(where I’ve written 1 instead of 1s because these are equal
anyway.) This formula makes perfectly good sense provided s is
real and greater than 1. It’s true because

       60–s ¼ 2–3s 63–2s 65–s

and similarly for any positive integer.
    In fact, the formula makes perfectly good sense if s = aþib is
complex and its real part a is greater than 1. The final series in
the formula is called the Riemann zeta function of s, denoted by
zðsÞ. Here z is the Greek letter zeta.
    In 1859 Georg Riemann wrote a brief, astonishingly inven-
tive paper showing that the analytic properties of the zeta
function reveal deep statistical features of primes, including
Gauss’s prime number theorem. In fact, he could do more: he
could make the error in the approximation of pðxÞ much smaller,
by adding further terms to Gauss’s expression. Infinitely many
such terms, themselves forming a convergent series, would make
the error disappear altogether. Riemann could write down an
exact expression for pðxÞ as an analytic series.
    For the record, here’s his formula:

       pðxÞ þ pðx1=2 Þ þ pðx1=3 Þ þ . . .
                  Z ?                                     X
                         2               1
       ¼ LiðxÞ þ         ðt  1Þt log t       t  log 2    Liðxr Þ
                    x                                    r

where r runs through the non-trivial zeros of the zeta function.
Strictly speaking, this formula is not quite correct when the left-
218 // The Riemann Hypothesis



hand side has discontinuities, but that can be fixed up. You can
get an even more complicated formula for pðxÞ itself by applying
the formula again with x replaced by x1=2 ; x1=3 , and so on.
    All very pretty, but there was one tiny snag. In order to prove
that his series is correct, Riemann needed to establish an
apparently straightforward property of the zeta function.
Unfortunately, he couldn’t find a proof.
    All complex analysts learn at their mother’s knee (the mother
here being Augustin-Louis Cauchy, who along with Gauss first
understood the point) that the best way to understand any
complex function is to work out where its zeros lie. That is: which
complex numbers s make zðsÞ ¼ 0? Well, it becomes the best way
after some nifty footwork; in the region where the series for zðsÞ
converges, there aren’t any zeros. However, there is another
formula which agrees with the series whenever it converges, but
also makes sense when it doesn’t. This formula lets us extend the
definition of zðsÞ so that it makes sense for all complex numbers
s. And this ‘analytic continuation’ of the zeta function does have
zeros. Infinitely many of them.
    Some of the zeros are obvious – once you see the formula
involved in the continuation process. These ‘trivial zeros’ are the
negative even integers 2; 4; 6, and so on. The other zeros
come in pairs a þ ib and a  ib, and all such zeros that Riemann
could find had a ¼ 12. The first three pairs, for instance, are
       1            1            1
       2 +14:13i;   2 +21:02i;   2 +25:01i

Evidence like this led Riemann to conjecture (‘hypothesise’) that
all non-trivial zeros of the zeta function must lie on the so-called
critical line 12 þ ib.
    If he could prove this statement – the famous Riemann
Hypothesis – then he could prove that Gauss’s approximate
formula for pðxÞ is correct. He could improve it to an exact –
though complicated – formula. Great vistas of number theory
would be wide open for development.
    But he couldn’t, and we still can’t.
    Eventually, the prime number theorem was proved, inde-
                                    The Riemann Hypothesis // 219



pendently, by Jacques Hadamard and Charles de la Vallée-
Poussin in 1896. They used complex analysis, but managed to
find a proof that avoided the Riemann Hypothesis. We now
know that the first ten trillion non-trivial zeros of the zeta
function lie on the critical line, thanks to Xavier Gourdon and
Patrick Demichel in 2004. You might think that ought to settle
the matter, but in this area of number theory ten trillion is
ridiculously small, and may be misleading.
    The Riemann Hypothesis is important for several reasons. If
true, it would tell us a lot about the statistical properties of
primes. In particular, Helge von Koch proved in 1901 that the
Riemann Hypothesis is true if and only if the estimate
                          pﬃﬃﬃ
        jpðxÞ  LiðxÞj < C x log x

for the error in Gauss’s formula holds for some constant C. Later,
Lowell Schoenfeld proved that we can take C ¼ 1=8p for all
x52;657. (Sorry, this area of mathematics does that kind of
thing.) The point here is that the error is small compared with x,
and it tells us how much the primes fluctuate away from their
more typical behaviour.
    Riemann’s exact formula, of course, would also follow from
the Riemann Hypothesis. So would a huge list of other
mathematical results – you can find some of them at
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riemann_hypothesis
    However, the main reason why the Riemann Hypothesis is
important – apart from ‘because it’s there’ – is that it has a lot of
far-reaching analogues and generalisations in algebraic number
theory. A few of the analogues have even been proved. There is a
feeling that if the Riemann Hypothesis can be proved in its
original form, then so can the generalisations. These ideas are
too technical to describe, but see mathworld.wolfram.com/
RiemannHypothesis.html
    I will tell you one deceptively simple statement that is
equivalent to the Riemann Hypothesis. Of itself, it looks
harmless and unimportant. Not so! Here’s how it goes. If n is a
220 // Anti-Atheism



whole number, then the sum of its divisors, including n itself, is
written as sðnÞ. (Here s is the lower-case Greek letter ‘sigma’.) So

       sð24Þ ¼ 1 þ 2 þ 3 þ 4 þ 6 þ 8 þ 12 þ 24 ¼ 60
       sð12Þ ¼ 1 þ 2 þ 3 þ 4 þ 6 þ 12 ¼ 28

and so on. In 2002 Jeffrey Lagarias proved that the Riemann
Hypothesis is equivalent to the inequality

       sðnÞ4eHn log Hn

for every n. Here Hn is the nth harmonic number, equal to
          1 1 1      1
       1 þ þ þ þ ...

...........................................
          2 3 4      n




Anti-Atheism
Godfrey Harold Hardy, a Cambridge mathematician who worked
mainly in analysis, claimed to believe in God – but unlike most
believers, he considered the Deity to be his personal enemy.
Hardy had it in for God, and he was convinced that God had it in
for Hardy, which was only fair. Hardy was especially worried
whenever he travelled by sea, in case God sank the boat. So
before travelling, he would send his colleagues a telegram: ‘HAVE
PROVED RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS. HARDY.’ He would then retract this
claim on arrival.
    As just discussed, the Riemann Hypothesis is the most
famous unsolved problem in mathematics, and one of the most
important. And so it was in Hardy’s day, too. When his
colleagues asked him why he sent such telegrams, he explained
that God would never let him die if that would give him credit –


...........................................
however controversial – for proving the Riemann Hypothesis.
                                        Murder in the Park // 221



Disproof of the Riemann Hypothesis
Consider the following logical argument:

. Elephants never forget.
. No creature that has ever won Mastermind has possessed a
    trunk.
. A creature that never forgets will always win Mastermind
    provided it takes part in the competition.
. A creature lacking a trunk is not an elephant.
. In 2001 an elephant took part in Mastermind.
Therefore:

. The Riemann Hypothesis is false.
Is this a correct deduction?


...........................................
    Answer on page 302



Murder in the Park
This puzzle – like several in this book – goes back to the great
English puzzlist Henry Ernest Dudeney. He called it ‘Ravensdene
Park’. I’ve made a few trivial changes.




                                                 Ravensdene Park.

   Soon after a heavy fall of snow, Cyril Hastings entered
Ravensdene Park at gate D, walked straight to the position
222 // The Cube of Cheese



marked with a black dot, and was stabbed through the heart. His
body was found the next morning, along with several tracks in
the snow. The police immediately closed the park.
    Their subsequent investigations revealed that each track had
been made by a different, very distinctive shoe. Witnesses placed
four individuals, other than Hastings, in the park during the
period concerned. So the murderer had to be one of them.
Examining their shoes, the police deduced that:

. The butler – who could prove he had been in the house X at
   the time of the murder – had entered at gate E and gone to X.
. The gamekeeper – who had no such alibi – had entered at gate
   A and gone to his lodge at Y.
. A local youth had entered at gate G and left by gate B.
. The grocer’s wife had entered at gate C and left by gate F.
None of these individuals entered or left the park more than
once.
   It had been foggy as well as snowy, so the routes these people
took were often rather indirect. The police did notice that no two
paths crossed. But they failed to make a sketch of the routes
before the snow melted and they disappeared.
   So who was the murderer?


...........................................
   Answer on page 303



The Cube of Cheese
An oldie, but none the worse for that. Marigold Mouse has a cube
of cheese and a carving-knife. She wishes to slice the cheese
along a flat plane, to obtain a cross-section that is a regular
hexagon. Can she do this, and if so, how?


...........................................
   Answer on page 304
                                          The Game of Life // 223



The Game of Life
In the 1970s John Conway invented the Game of Life. Strange
black creatures scuttle across a grid of white tiles, changing
shape, growing, collapsing, freezing and dying. The best way to
play Life (as it’s commonly known) is to download suitable
software. There are several excellent free programs for Life on the
web, easily located by searching. A Java version, which is easy to
use and will give hours of pleasure, can be found at:
www.bitstorm.org/gameoflife/
    Life is played with black counters on a potentially infinite
grid of square cells. Each cell holds either one counter or none.
At each stage, or generation, the set of counters defines a
configuration. The initial configuration at generation 0 evolves at
successive stages according to a short list of rules. The rules are
illustrated in the diagrams below. The neighbours of a given cell
are the eight cells immediately adjacent to it, horizontally,
vertically or diagonally. All births and deaths occur simultan-
eously: what happens to each counter or empty cell in
generation nþ1 depends only on its neighbours in generation n.




                     An occupied cell and its eight neighbours.




                                             Rule 1: If a counter
                                             (black) has two or three
                                             neighbours (grey), it
                                             survives to the next
                                             generation – that is, it
                                             remains in the same
                                             cell.
224 // The Game of Life




                                          Rule 2: If a counter
                                          (black) has four or more
                                          neighbours (grey), it dies
                                          in the next generation –
                                          that is, it is removed.




                                           Rule 3: If a counter
                                           (black) has no
                                           neighbours, or just one
                                           (grey), it dies in the next
                                           generation.


                                           Rule 4: If an empty cell
                                           (centre) has exactly
                                           three neighbours
                                           (grey), it gives birth
                                           (black) in the next
                                           generation – that is, a
                                           counter is placed in that
                                           cell. The neighbours
                                           may live or die,
                                           depending on their
                                           neighbours.


    Starting from any given initial configuration, the rules are
applied repeatedly to produce the life history of its succeeding
generations. For example, here is the life history of a small
triangle built from four counters:
                                             The Game of Life // 225




       Life history of a configuration. Configurations 8 and 9 alternate
       periodically.

     Even this simple examples shows that the rules for Life can
generate complex structures from simpler ones. Here the
sequence of generations becomes periodic: at generation 10 the
configuration is the same as at generation 8, and thereafter
configurations 8 and 9 alternate, a sequence known as traffic
lights.
     One of the fascinations of Life is the astonishing variety of
life histories, and the absence of any obvious relation between the
initial configuration and what it turns into. The system of rules is
entirely deterministic – the entire infinite future of the system is
implicit in its initial state. But Life dramatically demonstrates the
226 // The Game of Life



difference between determinism and predictability. This is where
the name ‘Life’ comes from.
    From a mathematical point of view, it is natural to classify
Life configurations according to their long-term behaviour. For
example, configurations may:

(1) disappear completely (die)

(2) attain a steady state (stasis)

(3) repeat the same sequence over and over again (periodicity)

(4) repeat the same sequence over and over again but end up in a
new location

(5) behave chaotically

(6) exhibit computational behaviour (universal Turing
machine).

Among the common periodic configurations are the blinker and
traffic lights, with periods 3 and 8, respectively:




                                              Two periodic
                                              configurations.


    The outcome of a game of Life is extraordinarily sensitive to
the precise choice of the initial state. A difference of one cell can
totally change the state’s future. Moreover, simple initial
configurations can sometimes develop into very complicated
ones. This behaviour – to some extent ‘designed in’ by the choice
of update rules – motivates the game’s name.
                                             The Game of Life // 227




       The left-hand S-shaped configuration eventually settles down
       after 1,405 generations, by which time it has given birth to 2
       gliders, 24 blocks, 6 ponds, 4 loaves, 18 beehives and 8 blinkers.
       If you delete just one cell to give the right-hand configuration,
       everything dies completely after 61 generations.

   The prototype mobile state is the glider, which moves one cell
diagonally every four moves:




       Motion of a glider.

   Three spaceships (lightweight, middleweight, heavyweight)
repeat cycles that cause them to move horizontally, throwing off
sparks that vanish immediately. Longer spaceships do not work
on their own – they break apart in complicated ways – but they
can be supported by flotillas of accompanying smaller spaceships.




       Spaceships.

   One of the earliest mathematical questions about Life was
whether there can exist a finite initial configuration whose future
configurations are unbounded – that is, it will become as large as
we wish if we allow enough time to pass. This question was
answered in the affirmative by Bill Gosper’s invention of a glider
gun. The configuration shown below in black oscillates with
228 // Two-Horse Race



period 30, and repeatedly fires gliders (the first two are shown in
grey). The stream of gliders grows unboundedly.




       The glider gun, with two gliders it has spat out.

    It turns out that the Game of Life has configurations which
act like computers, able in principle to calculate anything that a
computer program can specify. For example, such a configura-
tion can compute p to as many decimal places as we want. In
practice, such computations run incredibly slowly, so don’t
throw away your PC just yet.
    In fact, even simpler ‘games’ of the same kind – known as
cellular automata (page 239) – living on a line of squares instead
of a two-dimensional array, can behave as universal computers.
This automaton, known as ‘rule 110’, was suggested by Stephen
Wolfram in the 1980s, and Matthew Cook proved its universality
in the 1990s. It illustrates, in a very dramatic way, how
astonishingly complex behaviour can be generated by very


...........................................
simple rules. See mathworld.wolfram.com/Rule110.html



Two-Horse Race
Every whole number can be obtained by multiplying suitable
primes together. If this requires an even number of primes, we
say that the number is of even type. If it requires an odd number
of primes, we say that the number is of odd type. For instance,
       96 ¼ 26262626263
                                            Two-Horse Race // 229



uses six primes, so is of even type. On the other hand,
       105 ¼ 36567

uses three primes, so is of odd type. By convention, 1 is of even
type.
   For the first ten whole numbers, 1–10, the types are:
       Odd        2 3        5       7 8
       Even 1            4       6         9 10

A striking fact emerges: in general, odd types occur at least as
frequently as even types. Imagine two horses, Odd and Even,
racing. Start them level with each other, and read along the
sequence of numbers: 1; 2; 3; . . . At each stage, move Odd forward
one step if the next number has odd type; move Even forward
one step if the next number has even type. So:
       After 1 step, Even is ahead.
       After 2 steps, Odd and Even are level.
       After 3 steps, Odd is ahead.
       After 4 steps, Odd and Even are level.
       After 5 steps, Odd is ahead.
       After 6 steps, Odd and Even are level.
       After 7 steps, Odd is ahead.
       After 8 steps, Odd is ahead.
       After 9 steps, Odd is ahead.
       After 10 steps, Odd and Even are level.
Odd always seems to be level, or ahead. In 1919 George Pólya
conjectured that Odd never falls behind Even, except right at the
start, step 1. Calculations showed that this is true for the first
million steps. Given this weight of favourable evidence, surely it
has to be true for any number of steps?
    Without a computer you can waste a lot of time on this
question, so I’ll tell you the answer. Pólya was wrong! In 1958,
Brian Haselgrove proved that at some (unknown) stage Odd falls
behind Even. Once reasonably fast computers were available, it
was easy to test ever larger numbers. In 1960 Robert Lehman
discovered that Even is in the lead at step 906,180,359. In 1980
230 // Drawing an Ellipse – and More?



Minoru Tanaka proved that Even first takes the lead at step
906,150,257.
    This kind of thing is what makes mathematicians insist upon
proofs. And it shows that even a number like 906,150,257 can be


...........................................
interesting and unusual.



Drawing an Ellipse – and More?
It is well known that an easy way to draw an ellipse is to fix two
pins through the paper, tie a loop of string round them, and
place your pencil so that the string stays taut. Gardeners
sometimes use this method to map out elliptical flowerbeds. The
two pins are the foci (plural of focus, and pronounced ‘foe-sigh’)
of the ellipse.




                                        How to draw an ellipse.


   Suppose that you use three pegs, in a triangle. It need not be
an equilateral or isosceles triangle.




                                Why isn’t this interesting too?
                                       The Kepler Problem // 231



  That ought to give some interesting new kinds of curves. So
why don’t the mathematics books mention them?


...........................................
   Answer on page 304



Mathematical Jokes 3
Two mathematicians in a cocktail bar are arguing about how
much maths the ordinary person knows. One thinks they’re
hopelessly ignorant; the other says that quite a few people
actually know a lot about the subject.
    ‘Bet you twenty pounds I’m right,’ says the first, as he heads
for the gents. While he is gone, his colleague calls the waitress
over.
    ‘Listen, there’s ten pounds in it for you if you come over
when my friend gets back and answer a question. The answer is
‘‘one-third x cubed.’’ Got that?’
    ‘Ten pounds for saying ‘‘One thirdex cue?’’ ’
    ‘No, one-third x cubed.’
    ‘One thir dex cubed?’
    ‘Yeah, that’ll do.’
    The other mathematician comes back, and the waitress
comes over.
    ‘Hey – what’s the integral of x squared?’
    ‘One third x cubed,’ says the waitress. As she walks away, she


...........................................
adds, over her shoulder, ‘Plus a constant.’



The Kepler Problem
Mathematicians have learned that apparently simple questions
are often hard to answer, and apparently obvious facts may be
false, or may be true but extremely hard to prove. The Kepler
problem is a case in point: it took nearly three hundred years to
232 // The Kepler Problem



solve it, even though everyone knew the correct answer from the
start.
     It all began in 1611 when Johannes Kepler, a mathematician
and astrologer (yes, he cast horoscopes; lots of mathematicians
did at that time – it was a quick way to make money) wanted to
give his sponsor a New Year’s gift. The sponsor rejoiced in the
name Johannes Mathäus Wacker of Wackenfels, and Kepler
wanted to say ‘thanks for all the cash’ without actually spending
any of it. So he wrote a book, and presented it to his sponsor. Its
title (in Latin) was The Six-Cornered Snowflake. Kepler started with
the curious shapes of snowflakes, which often form beautiful
sixfold symmetric crystals, and asked why this happened.




                                                A typical ‘dendritic’
                                                snowflake.


    It is often said that ‘no two snowflakes are alike’. The logician
in me objects ‘How can you tell?’ but a back-of-the-envelope
calculation suggests that there are so many features in a
‘dendritic’ snowflake, of the kind illustrated, that the chance of
two being identical is pretty much zero.
    No matter. What matters here is that Kepler’s analysis of the
snowflake led him to the idea that its sixfold symmetry arises
because that’s the most efficient way to pack circles in a plane.
    Take a lot of coins, of the same denomination – pennies, say.
If you lay them on a table and push them together tightly, you
                                         The Kepler Problem // 233



quickly discover that they fit perfectly into a honeycomb
pattern, or ‘hexagonal lattice’:


                                             (Left) The closest way to
                                             pack circles, and (right)
                                             a less efficient lattice
                                             packing.

    And this is the closest packing – the one that fills space most
efficiently, in the ideal case of infinitely many circles arranged on
a plane. Alternatives, such as the square lattice on the right, are
less efficient.
    Mind you, this innocent assertion wasn’t proved until 1940,
when László Fejes Tóth managed it. (Axel Thue sketched out a
proof in 1892, and gave more details in 1910, but he left some
gaps.) Tóth’s proof was quite hard. Why the difficulty? We don’t
know, to begin with, that the most efficient packing forms a
regular lattice. Maybe something more random could work
better. (For finite packings, say inside a square, this can actually
happen – see the next puzzle, about a milk crate.)
    Along the way, Kepler came very close indeed to the idea that
all matter is made from tiny indivisible components, which we
now call ‘atoms’. This is impressive, given that he did no
experiments in the course of writing his book. Atomic theory,
introduced by the Greek Democritus, was not established
experimentally until about 1900.
    Kepler had his eye on something a bit more complicated,
though: the closest way to pack identical spheres in space. He
was aware of three regular ‘lattice’ packings, which we now call
the hexagonal, cubic and face-centred cubic lattices. The first of
these is formed by stacking lots of honeycomb layers of spheres
on top of one another, with the centres of corresponding spheres
forming a vertical line. The second is made from square-lattice
layers, also stacked vertically. For the third, we stack hexagonal
layers, but fit the spheres in any given layer into the hollows in
the one below.
234 // The Kepler Problem



    You can get the same result, though tilted, by similarly
stacking square-lattice layers so that the spheres in any given
layer fit into the hollows in the one below – this isn’t entirely
obvious, and – like the milk crate puzzle – it shows that intuition
may not be a good guide in this area. The picture shows how this
happens: the horizontal layers are square, but the slanting layers
are hexagonal.


                                      Part of a face-centred
                                      cubic lattice.




    Now, every greengrocer knows that the way to stack oranges
is to use the face-centred cubic lattice.* By thinking about
pomegranate seeds, Kepler was led to the casual remark that with
the face-centred cubic lattice, ‘the packing will be the tightest
possible’.
    That was in 1611. The proof that Kepler was right had to wait
until 1998, when Thomas Hales announced that he had achieved
this with massive computer assistance. Basically, Hales consid-
ered all possible ways to surround a sphere with other spheres,
and showed that if the arrangement wasn’t the one found in the
face-centred cubic lattice, then the spheres could be shoved
closer together. Tóth’s proof in the plane used the same ideas,
but he only had to check about forty cases.
    Hales had to check thousands, so he rephrased the problem
in terms that could be verified by a computer. This led to a huge
computation – but each step in it is essentially trivial. Almost all
of the proof has been checked independently, but a very tiny
level of doubt still remains. So Hales has started a new computer-

*   They don’t say it that way, but they stack it that way.
                                    The Milk Crate Problem // 235



based project to devise a proof that can be verified by standard
proof-checking software. Even then, a computer will be involved
in the verifications, but the software concerned does such simple
things – in principle – that a human can check that the software
does what it is supposed to. The project will probably take 20
years. You can still object on philosophical grounds if you wish,
but you’ll be splitting logical hairs very finely indeed.
    What makes the problem so hard? Greengrocers usually start
with a square box that has a flat base, so they naturally pack their
oranges in layers, making each layer a square lattice. It is then
natural to make the second layer fill the gaps in the bottom one,
and so on. If by chance they start with a hexagonal layer instead,
they get the same packing anyway, except for a tilt. Gauss proved
in 1831 that Kepler’s packing is the tightest lattice packing. But
the mathematical problem here is to prove this, without
assuming at the start that the packing forms flat layers. The
mathematician’s spheres can hover unsupported in space. So the
greengrocer’s ‘solution’ involves a whole pile of assumptions –
well, actually, oranges. Since experiments aren’t proofs, and here
even the experiment is dodgy, you can see that the problem


...........................................
could be harder than it seems.



The Milk Crate Problem
Here’s a simpler question of the same kind. A milkman wishes to
pack identical bottles, with circular cross-section, into a square
crate. To him, it’s obvious that for any given square number of
bottles – 1, 4, 9, 16, and so on – the crate can be made as small as
possible by packing the bottles in a regular square array. (He can
see that with a non-square number of bottles, there are gaps and
maybe the bottles can be jiggled around to shrink the crate.)
    Is he right?
236 // Equal Rights




                                    How the milkman fits
                                    16 bottles into the
                                    smallest possible
                                    square crate.




...........................................
   Answer on page 305



Equal Rights
One of the leading female mathematicians of the early twentieth
century was Emmy Noether, who studied at the University of
Göttingen. But after she completed her doctorate the authorities
refused to allow her to proceed to the status of Privatdozent,
which would allow her to charge students fees for tuition. Their
stated reason was that women were not permitted to attend
faculty meetings at the university senate. The head of the
mathematics department, the great David Hilbert, is said to have
remarked: ‘Gentlemen! There is nothing wrong with having a


...........................................
woman in the senate. Senate is not a public bath.’



Road Network
Four towns – Aylesbury, Beelsbury, Ceilsbury and Dealsbury – lie
at the corners of a square, of side 100 km. The highways
department wishes to connect them all together using the
shortest possible network of roads.
                                                 Tautoverbs // 237




                                        Not like this.



    ‘We can run roads straight from Aylesbury to Beelsbury to
Ceilsbury to Dealsbury,’ said the assistant town planner. ‘That’s
300 km of roads.’
    ‘No, we can do better than that!’ his boss replied. ‘Two
diagonals, which, if you recall your Pythagoras, amount to
     p
200 2 km – about 282 km.’
    What is the shortest network? Using the diagonals of the square
is not the answer.


...........................................
   Answer on page 305



Tautoverbs
In Terry Pratchett’s Discworld series of fantasy novels, the
members of the Order of Wen the Eternally Surprised, better
known as the History Monks, are greatly impressed by the
homespun wisdom of Mrs Marietta Cosmopilite. They have
never before heard her homely homilies (such as ‘I haven’t got
all day, you know’), so to those monks who follow the Way of
Mrs Cosmopilite, her simple assertions are marvellous new
philosophical insights.
    Mathematicians take a more jaundiced view of folk wisdom,
and habitually revise proverbs to make them more logical.
Indeed tautological – trivially true. Thus the proverb ‘Penny wise,
pound foolish’ becomes the tautoverb ‘Penny wise, wise about
238 // Tautoverbs



pennies,’ which makes more sense and is difficult to dispute. And
‘Look after the pennies and the pounds will look after
themselves’ is more convincing in the form ‘Look after the
pennies and the pennies will be looked after.’
     As a kid I was always vaguely bothered that in their original
form these two proverbs contradict each other, though I now see
this as the default mechanism whereby folk wisdom ensures that
it is perceived to be wise. The revised versions do not conflict –
clear evidence of their superiority. I’ll give you a couple of other
examples to get you started, and then turn you lose on the
opening words of several proverbs. Your job is to complete them
to make tautoverbs. The first example is simple and direct, the
other more baroque. Both forms are permissible. So is helpful
commentary, preferably blindingly obvious. Logical quibbles are
actively encouraged – the more pedantic, the better.

. He who fights and runs away will live to run away again.
. A bird in the bush is worth two in the hand, because free-
    range produce is always expensive.

OK, now it’s your turn. In the same spirit, complete the
following tautoverbs:

.   No news is—
.   The bigger they are—
.   Nothing ventured—
.   Too many cooks—
.   You cannot have your cake—
.   A watched pot—
.   If pigs had wings—

If you have enjoyed this game, psychiatric help is recommended,
but until it arrives you can find a lot more proverbs to work on at
www.manythings.org/proverbs/index.html


...........................................
    Answers on page 306
                                          Complexity Science // 239



Complexity Science
Complexity science, or the theory of complex systems, came to
prominence with the founding of the Santa Fe Institute (SFI) in
1984, by George Cowan and Murray Gell-Mann. This was, and
still is, a private research centre for interdisciplinary science, with
emphasis on ‘the sciences of complexity’. You might think that
‘complexity’ refers to anything complicated, but the SFI’s main
objective has been to develop and disseminate new mathema-
tical techniques that could shed light on systems in which very
large numbers of agents or entities interact with one another
according to relatively simple rules. A key phenomenon is what
is called emergence, in which the system as a whole behaves in
ways that are not available to the individual entities.
     An example of a real-world complex system is the human
brain. Here the entities are nerve cells – neurons – and the
emergent features include intelligence and consciousness.
Neurons are neither intelligent nor conscious, but when enough
of them are hooked together, these abilities emerge. Another
example is the world’s financial system. Now the entities are
bankers and traders, and emergent features include stock-market
booms and crashes. Other examples are ants’ nests, ecosystems
and evolution. You can probably work out what the entities are
for each of these, and think of some emergent features. Anyone
can play this game.
     What’s harder, and what SFI was, and still is, all about, is to
model such systems mathematically in a way that reflects their
underlying structure as an interacting system of simple compo-
nents. One such modelling technique is to employ a cellular
automaton – a more general version of John Conway’s Game of
Life. This is like a computer game played on a square grid. At any
given instant, each square exists in some state, usually repre-
sented by what colour it is. As time ticks to the next instant, each
square changes colour according to some list of rules. The rules
involve the colours of neighbouring squares, and might be
240 // Complexity Science



something like this: ‘a red square changes to green if it has
between two and six blue neighbours’. Or whatever.




                                                Three types of
                                                pattern formed by a
                                                simple cellular
                                                automaton: static
                                                (blocks of the same
                                                colour), structured
                                                (the spirals), and
                                                chaotic (for example
                                                the irregular patch at
                                                bottom right).

    It might seem unlikely that such a rudimentary gadget can
achieve anything interesting, let alone solve deep problems of
complexity science, but it turns out that cellular automata can
behave in rich and unexpected ways. In fact their earliest use, by
John von Neumann in the 1940s, was to prove the existence of
an abstract mathematical system that could self-replicate – make
copies of itself.* This suggested that the ability of living creatures
to reproduce is a logical consequence of their physical structure,
rather than some miraculous or supernatural process.
    Evolution, in Darwin’s sense, offers a typical example of the
complexity-theory approach. The traditional mathematical
model of evolution is known as population genetics, which goes

*   There is now a lot of interest in doing the same with real
    machines, using nanotechnology. There are many science fiction
    stories about ‘Von Neumann machines’, often employed by aliens
    or machine cultures to invade planets, including our own. The
    techniques used to pack millions of electronic components on to
    a tiny silicon chip are now being used to build extremely tiny
    machines, ‘nanobots’, and a true replicating machine may not be
    so far away. Alien invasions are not a current cause for concern,
    but the possibility of a mutant Von Neumann machine turning
    the Earth into ‘grey goo’ has raised issues about the safety, and
    control, of nanotechnology. See en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grey_goo
                                            Complexity Science // 241



back to the British statistician Sir Ronald Fisher, around 1930.
This approach views an ecosystem – a rainforest full of different
plants and insects, or a coral reef—as a vast pool of genes. As the
organisms reproduce, their genes are mixed together in new
combinations.
    For example, a hypothetical population of slugs might have
genes for green or red skins, and other genes for a tendency to
live in bushes or on bright red flowers. Typical gene combina-
tions are green–bush, green–flower, red–bush, and red–flower.
Some combinations have greater survival value than others. For
example red–bush slugs would easily be seen by birds against the
green bushes they live in, whereas red–flower slugs would be less
visible.
    As natural selection weeds out unfit combinations, the
combinations that allow organisms to survive better tend to
proliferate. Random genetic mutations keep the gene pool
simmering. The mathematics centres on the proportions of
particular genes in the population, and works out how those
proportions change in response to selection.
    A complexity model of slug evolution would be very
different. For instance, we could set up a cellular automaton,
assigning various environmental characteristics to each cell. For
example, a cell might correspond to a piece of bush, or a flower,
or whatever. Then we choose a random selection of cells and
populate them with ‘virtual slugs’, assigning a combination of
slug genes to each such cell.
    Other cells could be ‘virtual predators’. Then we specify rules
for how the virtual organisms move about the grid and interact
with one another. For example, at each time-step a slug must
either stay put or move to a random neighbouring cell. On the
other hand, a predator might ‘see’ the nearest slug and move five
cells towards it, ‘eating’ it if it reaches the slug’s own cell – so that
particular virtual slug is removed from the computer’s memory.
    We would set up the rules so that green slugs are less likely to
be ‘seen’ if they are on bushes rather than flowers. Then this
mathematical computer game would be allowed to run for a few
242 // Complexity Science



million time-steps, and we would read off the proportions of
various surviving slug gene combinations.
    Complexity theorists have invented innumerable models in
the same spirit: building in simple rules for interactions between
many individuals, and then simulating them on a computer to
see what happens. The term ‘artificial life’ has been coined to
describe such activities. A celebrated example is Tierra, invented
by Tom Ray around 1990. Here, short segments of computer
code compete with one another inside the computer’s memory,
reproducing and mutating (see www.nis.atr.jp/~ray/tierra/). His
simulations show spontaneous increases in complexity, rudi-
mentary forms of symbiosis and parasitism, lengthy periods of
stasis punctuated by rapid changes – even a kind of sexual
reproduction. So the message from the simulations is that all
these puzzling phenomena are entirely natural, provided they
are seen as emergent properties of simple mathematical rules.
    The same difference in working philosophy can be seen in
economics. Conventional mathematical economics is based on a
model in which every player has complete and instant
information. As the Stanford economist Brian Arthur puts it, the
assumption is that ‘If two businessmen sit down to negotiate a
deal, in theory each can instantly foresee all contingencies, work
out all possible ramifications, and effortlessly choose the best
strategy.’ The goal is to demonstrate mathematically that any
economic system will rapidly home in on an equilibrium state,
and remain there. In equilibrium, every player is assured of the
best possible financial return for themselves, subject to the
overall constraints of the system. The theory puts formal flesh on
the verbal bones of Adam Smith’s ‘invisible hand of the market’.
    Complexity theory challenges this cosy capitalist utopia in a
number of ways. One central tenet of classical economic theory is
the ‘law of diminishing returns’, which originated with the
English economist David Ricardo around 1820. This law asserts
that any economic activity that undergoes growth must even-
tually be limited by constraints. For example, the plastics industry
depends upon a supply of oil as raw material. When oil is cheap,
                                          Complexity Science // 243



many companies can move over from, say, metal components to
plastic ones. But this creates increasing demand for oil, so the
price goes up. At some level, everything balances out.
    Modern hi-tech industries, however, do not follow this
pattern at all. It costs perhaps a billion dollars to set up a factory
to make the latest generation of computer memory chips, and
until the factory begins production, the returns are zero. But
once the factory is in operation, the cost of producing chips is
tiny. The longer the production run, the cheaper chips are to
make. So here we see a law of increasing returns: the more goods
you make, the less it costs you to do so.
    From the point of view of complex systems, the market is not
a simple mathematical equilibrium-seeker, but a ‘complex
adaptive system’, where interacting agents modify the rules that
govern their own behaviour. Complex adaptive systems often
settle into interesting patterns, strangely reminiscent of the
complexities of the real world. For example, Brian Arthur and his
colleagues have set up computer models of the stock market in
which the agents search for patterns – genuine or illusory – in the
market’s behaviour, and adapt their buying and selling rules
according to what they perceive. This model shares many
features of real stock markets. For example, if many agents
‘believe’ that the price of a stock will rise, they buy it, and the
belief becomes self-fulfilling.
    According to conventional economic theory, none of these
phenomena should occur. So why do they happen in complexity
models? The answer is that the classical models have inbuilt
mathematical limitations, which preclude most kinds of ‘inter-
esting’ dynamics. The greatest strength of complexity theory is
that it resembles the untidy creativity of the real world.
Paradoxically, it makes a virtue of simplicity, and draws far-
ranging conclusions from models with simple – but carefully


...........................................
chosen – ingredients.
244 // Scrabble Oddity



Scrabble Oddity
The letter scores at Scrabble are:
       Score 1           A, E, I, L, N, O, R, S, T, U
       Score 2           D, G
       Score 3           B, C, M, P
       Score 4           F, H, V, W, Y
       Score 5           K
       Score 8           J, X
       Score 10        Q, Z
Which positive integer is equal to its own Scrabble score when
spelt out in full?


...........................................
   Answer on page 306



Dragon Curve
The picture shows a sequence of curves, called dragon curves
(look at the last one). The sequence can be continued
indefinitely, getting ever more complicated curves.
    What is the rule for making them? Ignore the ‘rounding’ of the
corners by the short lines, which is done so that later curves in
the sequence remain intelligible.




                                                  The first
                                                  nine
                                                  dragon curves.



...........................................
   Answer on page 307
                                               Counterflip // 245



Counterflip
Make some circular counters out of card, each black on one side
and white on the other (the precise number doesn’t matter, but
10 or 12 is about right). Arrange them in a row, with a random
choice of colours facing upwards.
    Your task is now to remove all the counters, by making a
series of moves. Each move involves choosing a black counter,
removing it, and flipping any neighbouring counters over to
change their colours. Counters are ‘neighbours’ if they are next
to each other in the original row of counters; removing any
counter creates a gap. As the game progresses, a counter may
have two, one or no neighbours.
    Here is a sample game in which the player succeeds in
removing all the counters:




                                                Sample game
                                                of counterflip.
                                                Lines show
                                                neighbours.

    The key to this puzzle is simple, but far from obvious: with
correct play, you can always succeed if the initial number of
black counters is odd. If it is even, there is no solution.
    You can play the game for fun, without analysing its
mathematical structure. If you feel ambitious, you can look for a
winning strategy – and explain why there is no way to win when
the initial number of black counters is even.

...........................................
   Answer on page 307
246 // Spherical Sliced Bread



Spherical Sliced Bread
Araminta Ponsonby took her two sets of quins to the Archimedes
bakery, which makes spherical loaves. She likes to go there
because each loaf is cut into ten slices, of equal thickness, so each
child can have one slice of bread. They have different appetites –
which is fortunate because some slices have smaller volume than
others. But, being extremely well-behaved, all ten children love
the crust, and want as much as they can get.
    Which slice has the most crust?


                                          The slices are the same
                                          thickness: which has the
                                          most crust?




    Assume that the loaf is a perfect sphere, the slices are formed
by parallel equally spaced planes, and the crust is infinitely thin –
so the amount of crust on each slice is equal to the area of the
corresponding part of the sphere’s surface.


...........................................
   Answer on page 309



Mathematical Theology
It is said that during Leonhard Euler’s second stint at the Court of
Catherine the Great, the French philosopher Denis Diderot was
trying to convert the Court to atheism. Since royalty generally
claims to have been appointed by God, this didn’t go down
terribly well. At any rate, Catherine asked Euler to put a spoke in
Diderot’s wheel. So Euler told the Court that he knew an algebraic
proof of the existence of God. Facing Diderot, he declaimed: ‘Sir,
                                   Mathematical Theology // 247



a þ bn =n ¼ x, hence God exists – reply!’ Diderot had no answer,
and left the Court to widespread laughter, humiliated.
    Yes, well . . . There are some little problems with this
anecdote, which seems to have originated with the English
mathematician Augustus De Morgan in his Budget of Paradoxes.
As the historian Dirk Struik pointed out in 1967, Diderot was an
accomplished mathematician who had published work on
geometry and probability, and would have been able to recognise
nonsense when he heard it. Euler, an even better mathematician,
would not have expected something that simple-minded to
work. The formula is a meaningless equation unless we know
what a, b, n and x are supposed to be. As Struik remarks, ‘No
reason exists to think that the thoughtful Euler would have
behaved in the asinine way indicated.’
    Euler was a religious man, who apparently considered the
Bible to be literal truth, but he also believed that knowledge
stems, in part, from rational laws. In the eighteenth century
there was occasional talk about the possibility of an algebraic
proof of the Deity’s existence, and Voltaire mentions one by
Maupertuis in his Diatribe.
    A much better attempt was found among Kurt Gödel’s
unpublished papers. Naturally, it is formulated in terms of
mathematical logic, and for the record here it is in its entirety:
       Ax:1   &Vx½fðxÞ ! cðxÞ6PðfÞ ! PðcÞ
       Ax:2   Pð:fÞp:PðfÞ
       Th:1   PðfÞ ! }9x½fðxÞ
       Df:1   GðxÞ , Vf½PðfÞ ! fðxÞ
       Ax:3   PðGÞ
       Th:2   }9xGðxÞ
       Df:2   f ess x , fðxÞ6VCCðxÞ ! &Vx½fðxÞ ! CðxÞ
       Ax:4   PðfÞ ! &PðfÞ
       Th:3   GðxÞ ! G ess x
       Df:3   EðxÞ , Vf½f ess x ! &9xfðxÞ
       Ax:5   PðEÞ
       Th:4   &9xGðxÞ

The symbolism belongs to a branch of mathematical logic called
modal logic. Roughly speaking, the proof works with ‘positive
248 // Mathematical Theology



properties’, denoted by P. The expression PðfÞ means that f is a
positive property. The property ‘being God’ is defined (Df.1) by
requiring God to have all positive properties. Here G(x) means
‘x has the property of being God’, which is a fancy way of saying
‘x is God’. The symbols & and } denote ‘necessary truth,’ and
‘contingent truth,’ respectively. The arrow ? means ‘implies’,
V is ‘for all’ and 9 is ‘there exists’. The symbol : means ‘not’, 6 is
‘and’, and $ and , are subtly different versions of ‘if and only
if’. The symbol ‘ess’ is defined in Df.2. The axioms are Ax.1–5.
The theorems (Th.1–4) culminate in the statement ‘there exists x
such that x has the property of being God’ – that is, God exists.
     The distinction between necessary and contingent truth is a
key novelty of modal logic. It distinguishes statements that must
be true (such as ‘2 þ 2 ¼ 4’ in a suitable axiomatic treatment of
mathematics) from those that conceivably might be false (such
as ‘it is raining today’). In conventional mathematical logic, the
statement ‘If A then B’ is always considered to be true when A is
false. For instance ‘2 þ 2 ¼ 5 implies 1 ¼ 1’ is true, and so is
‘2 þ 2 ¼ 5 implies 1 ¼ 42’. This may seem strange, but it is
possible to prove that 1 = 1 starting from 2 þ 2 ¼ 5, and it is also
possible to prove that 1 = 42 starting from 2 þ 2 ¼ 5. So the
convention makes good sense. Can you find any such proofs?
     If we extend this convention to human activities, then the
statement ‘If Hitler had won World War II then Europe would
now be a single nation’ is trivially true, because Hitler did not win
World War II. But ‘If Hitler had won World War II then pigs
would now have wings’ is also trivially true, for the same reason.
In modal logic, however, it would be sensible to debate the truth
or falsity of the first of these statements, depending on how
history might have changed if the Nazis had won the war. The
second would be false, because pigs don’t have wings.
     Gödel’s sequence of statements turns out to be a formal
version of the ontological argument put forward by St Anselm of
Canterbury in his Proslogion of 1077–78. Defining ‘God’ as ‘the
greatest conceivable entity’, Anselm argued that God is con-
                                    Mathematical Theology // 249



ceivable. But if he is not real, we could conceive of Him being
greater by existing in reality. Therefore, God must be real.
    Aside from deep issues of what we mean by ‘greatest’ and so
forth, there is a basic logical flaw here, one that every
mathematician learns at his mother’s knee. Before we can deduce
any property of some entity or concept from its definition, we
must first prove that something satisfying the definition exists.
Otherwise the definition might be self-contradictory. For
instance, suppose we define n to be ‘the largest whole number’.
Then we can easily prove that n ¼ 1. For if not, n2 > n, contra-
dicting the definition of n. Therefore 1 is the largest whole
number. The flaw is that we cannot use any properties of n until
we know that n exists. As it happens, it doesn’t – but even if it
did, we would have to prove that it did before proceeding with
the deduction.
    In short: in order to prove that God exists by Anselm’s line of
thinking, we must first establish that God exists (by some other
line of reasoning, or else the logic is circular). Of course I’ve
simplified things here, and later philosophers tried to remove the
flaw by being more careful with the logic or the philosophy.
Gödel’s proof is essentially a formal version of one proposed by
Leibniz. Gödel never published his proof because he was worried
that it might be seen as a rigorous demonstration of the existence
of God, whereas he viewed it as a formal statement of Leibniz’s
tacit assumptions, which would help to reveal potential logical
errors. For further analysis see
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del’s_ontological_proof and for a
detailed discussion of modal logic and its use in the proof see
www.stats.uwaterloo.ca/~cgsmall/ontology1.html


...........................................
   Answers on page 310
This page intentionally left blank
Professor Stewart’s Cunning
Crib Sheet
...........................................
Wherein the discerning or desperate reader may
locate answers to those questions that are
currently known to possess them . . . with
occasional supplementary facts for
their further edification.
252 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



Alien Encounter
Alfy is a Veracitor, whereas Betty and Gemma are Gibberish.
    There are only eight possibilities, so you can try each in turn. But
there’s a quicker way. Betty said that Alfy and Gemma belong to the
same species, but they have given different answers to the same
question, so Betty is Gibberish. Alfy said precisely that, making him a
Veracitor. Gemma said the opposite, so she must be Gibberish.

Curious Calculations
          161 ¼ 1
          11611 ¼ 121
          1116111 ¼ 12;321
          1;11161;111 ¼ 1;234;321
          11;111611;111 ¼ 123;454;321

If you know how to do ‘long multiplication’, you can see why this
striking pattern occurs. For instance,
          1116111 ¼
            11;100 þ
             1;110 þ
               111

We find one ‘1’ in the units column, two in the tens column, three in
the hundreds; then the numbers shrink again, with two in the
thousands and one in the ten thousands. So the answer must be
12,321.
    The pattern does continue – but your calculator may run out of
digits. In fact,
                  111; 1116111;111 ¼ 12;345;654;321
              1;111;11161;111;111 ¼ 1;234;567;654;321
            11;111;111611;111;111 ¼ 123;456;787;654;321
          111;111;1116111;111;111 ¼ 12;, 345; 678 ; 987;654;321

After this the pattern breaks down, because digits ‘carry’ and spoil it.
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 253


        142;85762 ¼ 285;714
        142;85763 ¼ 428;571
        142;85764 ¼ 571;428
        142;85765 ¼ 714;285
        142;85766 ¼ 857;142
        142;85767 ¼ 999;999

When we multiply 142,857 by 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6, we get the same
sequence of digits in cyclic order, but starting at a different place. The
999,999 is a bonus.
    This curious fact is not an accident. Basically, it happens because
1/7 in decimals is 0.142 857 142 857 . . . , repeating for ever.

Triangle of Cards




                                  The 15-card
                                  difference triangle.



Turnip for the Books
Hogswill started with 400 turnips.

    The way to solve this kind of puzzle is to work backwards.

Suppose that at the start of hour 4, Hogswill has x turnips. By the end
                          6x 1
of the hour he has sold     þ turnips, and since none are left, this
                           7 7
                 6x 1 x  1
equals x. So x  þ ¼            ¼ 0, and x = 1. Similarly, if he had x
                  7 7       7
                                      x1
turnips at the start of hour 3, then       ¼ 1, so x = 8. If he had x
                                     x71
turnips at the start of hour 2, then      ¼ 8, so x = 57. Finally, if he
                                       7
                                            x1
had x turnips at the start of hour 1, then        ¼ 57, so x = 400.
                                             7
254 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



The Four-Colour Theorem
Here are the four counties for which each is adjacent to all of the
others. The middle one is West Midlands – which coincidentally is
where I live – and the three surrounding it are Staffordshire,
Warwickshire and Worcestershire, clockwise from the top.




                                     These counties imply that we
                                     need at least four colours.



Shaggy Dog Story
First, the dodgy arithmetic. The method ‘works’ because the will’s
terms are inconsistent. The fractions do not add up to 1. In fact,
       1 1 1 17
        þ þ ¼
       2 3 9 18
which should make the trick obvious.
   Whoever first designed this puzzle was clever – there are very few
numbers that work, and this choice disguises the inconsistency very
neatly. I mean, how would you feel about a puzzle where the uncle
has 1,129 dogs, the sons are bequeathed 47, 11
                                             3      2
                                               and 15 of them, and
Lunchalot rides to the rescue with 26 extra dogs?
   However, there is another neat possibility: exactly the same,
except that the third son gets one-seventh of the dogs. If the same
trick works, how many dogs were there?
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 255



Answer to the Answer
The clue is that

         1 1 1 41
          þ þ ¼
         2 3 7 42
So there were 41 dogs.

Answer Continued
Oops, I nearly forgot the actual question: what did Gingerbere say to
Ethelfred that so offended Sir Lunchalot?
    It was this: ‘Surely you wouldn’t send a knight out on a dog like
this?’
    I said it was a shaggy dog story.

Confession
The shaggy dog story is inspired, in part, by the science fiction short
story ‘Fall of knight’ by A. Bertram Chandler, which appeared in
Fantastic Universe magazine in 1958.


Rabbits in the Hat
Nothing is wrong with the calculation, but its interpretation is
nonsense. When the various probabilities are combined, we are
working out the probability of extracting a black rabbit, over all
possible combinations of rabbits. It is fallacious to imagine that this
probability is valid for any specific combination. The fallacy is glaring
if there is only one rabbit in the hat. With one rabbit, a similar
argument (ignoring adding and removing a black rabbit, which
changes nothing essential) goes like this: the hat contains either B or
W, each with probability 12. The probability of extracting a black
rabbit is therefore

         1     1
           61 þ 60
         2     2
which is 12. Therefore (really?) half the rabbits in the hat are black, and
half are white.
    But there’s only one rabbit in the hat . . .
256 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



River Crossing 1 – Farm Produce
There are two solutions. One is:

(1) Take the goat across.

(2) Come back with no cargo, pick up the wolf, and take that
across.

(3) Bring the goat back, but leave the wolf.

(4) Drop off the goat, pick up the cabbage, cross the river, leave
the cabbage.

(5) Come back with no cargo, pick up the goat, take it across.

In the other, the roles of wolf and cabbage are exchanged.
   I like to solve this geometrically, using a picture in wolf–goat–
cabbage space. This consists of triples (w, g, c) where each symbol is
either 0 (on this side of the river) or 1 (on the far side). So, for
instance, (1, 0, 1) means that the wolf and cabbage are on the far side
but the goat is on this side. The problem is to get from (0, 0, 0) to
(1, 1, 1) without anything being eaten. We don’t need to say where
the farmer is, since he always travels in the boat during river
crossings.




                                               Wolf–goat–cabbage
                                               space: now it’s obvious.


   There are eight possible triples, and they can be thought of as the
vertices of a cube. Because only one item can accompany the farmer
on each trip, the permissible moves are the edges of the cube.
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 257



However, four edges (shown in grey) are not permitted, because
things get eaten. The remaining edges (black) do not cause mayhem.
    So the puzzle reduces to a geometric one: find a route along the
black edges, from (0, 0, 0) to (1, 1, 1). The two solutions are
immediately evident.


More Curious Calculations
(1) 1361167 ¼ 1;001, and this is why the trick works. If you
multiply a three-digit number abc by 1,001 the result is abcabc.
Why? Well, multiplying by 1,000 gives abc000. Then you add a
final abc to multiply by 1,001.

(2) For four-digit numbers, everything is similar, but we have to
multiply by 10,001. This can be done in two stages – multiply by
73 and then by 137 – because 736137 ¼ 10;001.

(3) For five-digit numbers we have to multiply by 100,001. This
can be done in two stages – multiply by 11 and then by 9,091 –
because 1169;091 ¼ 100;001. As a party trick, this is a bit
contrived, though.

(4) We get 471,471,471,471 – the same three digits repeated four
times. Why? Because
        7611613610169;901 ¼ 1;001;001;001

(5) Adding the final 128 leads to 128,000,000 – a million times
the original number. This trick works for all three-digit numbers,
and it does so because
        3636367611613637 ¼ 999;999

Add 1 and you get a million.
    You can turn all these tricks into party magic tricks. For instance,
the trick that turns 471,471 into 471 could be presented like this. The
magician, with eyes blindfolded, asks a member of the audience to
write down a three-digit number (say 471) on a blackboard or a sheet
of paper. A second person then writes it down twice (471,471). A
third, armed with a calculator, divides that by 13 (getting 36,267). A
fourth divides the result by 11 (getting 3,297). While this is going on,
258 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



the magician makes a lot of fuss about how unlikely it is that either of
these numbers divides without remainder. Then she asks what the
final result is, and instantly announces that the original number was
471.
   To work this out, she mentally divides 3,297 by 7. OK, you have
to be able to do that, but if you know your seven times table it’s easy.


Extracting the Cherry




                         After two matches
                         have been moved.




Make Me a Pentagon
Tie a knot in the strip, and flatten it – carefully.




                                         Pentagon from
                                         knotted strip.

    An interesting challenge is to prove that the result really is a
regular pentagon – in an idealised Euclidean version of the problem.
I’ll leave that for anyone who is interested.


Empty Glasses
Pick up the second glass from the left, pour its contents into the fifth
glass, and replace the second glass.


Three Quickies
(1) If you and your partner hold all the spades, your opponents
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 259



hold none, and vice versa. So the likelihood is the same in each
case.

(2) Three. You took three, so that’s how many you have.

(3) Zero. If five are in the right envelope, so is the sixth.

Knight’s Tours
There is no closed tour on the 565 square. Imagine colouring the
squares black and white in the usual chessboard fashion. Then the
knight changes colour at each move. A closed tour must then have
equal numbers of black and white squares. But 565 ¼ 25 is odd. The
same argument rules out closed tours on all squares with odd sides.
    There is no tour on the 4 6 4 square. The main obstacle is that
each corner square connects to only two other squares, and the
diagonally opposite corner also connects to those two squares. A little
thought proves that if a tour of all 16 squares exists, it must start at
one corner and finish in an adjacent corner. Systematic consideration
of possibilities shows that this is impossible.
    However, there is a tour that visits 15 of the 16 squares (showing
that the situation regarding a complete tour is delicate):




                                        How the knight
                                        can visit 15 squares.



White-Tailed Cats
Suppose that there are c cats, of which w have white tails. There are c
(c1) ordered pairs of distinct cats, and w(w1) ordered pairs of
white-tailed cats. (You can choose the first cat of the pair in c ways,
but the second in only c1 ways since you’ve used up one cat. Ditto
for white-tailed cats. By ‘ordered’ I mean that choosing first cat A and
260 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



then cat B is considered to be different from B first and then A. If you
don’t like that, then both formulas have to be halved – with the same
result.)
    This means that the probability of both cats having white tails is

           wðw  1Þ
           cðc  1Þ

and this must be 12. Therefore

           cðc  1Þ ¼ 2wðw  1Þ

with c and w whole numbers. The smallest solution is c ¼ 4,
w ¼ 3. The next smallest turns out to be c ¼ 21, w ¼ 15. Since Ms
Smith has fewer than 20 cats, she must have four cats, of which three
have white tails.


Perpetual Calendar
Each cube must include 1 and 2 so that 11 and 22 can be represented.
If only one cube bears a 0, then at most six of the nine numbers 01–
09 can be represented, so both must bear a 0 as well. That leaves six
spare faces for the seven digits 3–9, so the puzzle looks impossible . . .
until you realise that the cube bearing the number 6 can be turned
upside down to represent 9. So the white cube bears the numbers 0, 1,
2, 6 (also 9), 7 and 8, and the grey cube bears the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4
and 5. (Note that I’ve shown a 5 on my grey cube, and that tells us
which cube is which.)


Deceptive Dice
There is no best dice. If Innumeratus plays, and Mathophila chooses
correctly (as she will, because she’s like that), then he will lose, in the
long run. The odds will always favour Mathophila.
    How come? Mathophila has constructed her dice so that on
average, the yellow one beats the red one, the red one beats the blue
one – and the blue one beats the yellow one! At first sight this seems
impossible, so let me explain why it’s true.
    Each number occurs twice on each of the dice, so the chance of
rolling any particular number is always 13. So I can make a table of the
                                                 Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 261



possibilities, and see who wins for which combinations of numbers
thrown. Each combination has the same probability, 19.

Yellow versus red

                                                           1                                         5                                         9
....................................................................................................................................................................
                  3                                        Red                                       Yellow                                    Yellow
                  4                                        Red                                       Yellow                                    Yellow
                  8                                        Red                                       Red                                       Yellow
....................................................................................................................................................................

Here yellow wins five times out of nine, red wins only four times.



Red versus blue

                                                           3                                         4                                         8
....................................................................................................................................................................
                  2                                        Red                                       Red                                       Red
                  6                                        Blue                                      Blue                                      Red
                  7                                        Blue                                      Blue                                      Red
....................................................................................................................................................................

Here red wins five times out of nine, blue wins only four times.

Blue versus yellow

                                                           2                                         6                                         7
....................................................................................................................................................................
                  1                                        Blue                                      Blue                                      Blue
                  5                                        Yellow                                    Blue                                      Blue
                  9                                        Yellow                                    Yellow                                    Yellow
....................................................................................................................................................................

Here blue wins five times out of nine, yellow wins only four times.
         So yellow beats red 59 of the time, red beats blue 59 of the time, and
blue beats yellow 59 of the time.
         This gives Mathophila an advantage if she chooses second, which
she has cunningly arranged. If Innumeratus chooses the red dice, she
should choose yellow. If he chooses the yellow dice, she should
choose blue. And if he chooses the blue dice, she should choose red.
   It may not be a huge advantage – five chances out of nine of
winning, compared with four out of nine – but it’s still an advantage.
262 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



In the long run, Innumeratus will lose his pocket money. If he wants
to play, then a gentlemanly ‘No, you choose’ would be a good idea.
    It may seem impossible to have yellow ‘better than’ red, and red
‘better than’ blue – but not to have yellow ‘better than’ blue. What’s
happening is that the meaning of ‘better than’ depends on which
dice are being used. It’s a bit like three football teams:

. The Reds have a good goalkeeper and a good defence, but a
    poor attack. They win if and only if the opposing goalie is
    poor.
.   The Yellows have a poor goalie, a good defence, and a good
    attack. They win if and only if the opposing defence is poor.
.   The Blues have a good goalie, a poor defence, and a good
    attack. They win if and only if the opposing attack is poor.

Then (check this!) the Reds always beat the Yellows, the Yellows
always beat the Blues, and the Blues always beat the Reds.
   Dice like this are said to be intransitive. (‘Transitive’ means that if
A beats B and B beats C then A beats C. That doesn’t happen here.)
On the practical side, the existence of intransitive dice tells us that
some ‘obvious’ assumptions about economic behaviour are actually
wrong.


An Age-Old Old-Age Problem
Scrumptius was 69. There was no year 0 between BC dates and AD
dates. (If you decided that he might be 68 if he died earlier in the day
than he was born, you get a point for ingenuity. But you lose two for
pedantry, because it is usual to increase a person’s age by one year as
soon as their birthday begins, immediately after midnight.)


Heron Suit
The deduction is incorrect. Consider a cat with blunt claws that plays
with a gorilla, does not wear a heron suit, has a tail, has no whiskers
and is unsociable. The first five statements are all true, but the sixth is
not.
    I’d explain about the heron suit, but my cat has refused
permission on the grounds that it might incriminate itself.
                        Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 263



How to Unmake a Greek Cross




                                                        Converting a
                                                        Greek cross to a
                                                        square.



Euler’s Pentagonal Holiday
Here’s a solution to (b), which is automatically a solution to (a) as
well. There are others. But they all have to start and end at the two
vertices with valency 3, and a mirror-symmetric one must always
have the bottom edge of the pentagon in the middle of the tour.




                                     A solution with
                                     left-right symmetry.



Ouroborean Rings
One possible ouroborean ring for quadruplets is

       1111000010100110

There are others. The topic has a long history, going back to Irving
Good in 1946. Ouroborean rings exist for all m-tuples of n digits: for
example, in this one

       000111222121102202101201002

each triple of the three digits 0, 1, 2 occurs exactly once.
   How many ouroborean rings are there? In 1946 Nicholas de
Bruijn proved that for m-tuples formed from the two digits 0 and 1,
                 m1
                       m
this number is 22           , which grows extremely fast. Here rings
obtained by rotating a given one are considered to be the same.
264 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet




                  m                           Number of ouroborean rings
....................................................................................................................................................................
                  2                           1
                  3                           2
                  4                           16
                  5                           2,048
                  6                           67,108,864
                  7                           144,115,188,075,855,872
....................................................................................................................................................................



The Ourotorus
There is a unique solution, except for various symmetry transfor-
mations – rotation, reflection and translations horizontally or
vertically. Bear in mind the ‘wrap round’ convention. So you can, for
instance, cut off the four pieces on the right and move them to the
left.




                                                                                            Solution to the
                                                                                            ourotorus puzzle.



A Constant Bore
The only reason for including this kind of question in this kind of
book is if something surprising happens, and the only surprising
thing that makes much sense is that the answer does not depend on
the radius of the sphere.
         That sounds crazy – suppose the sphere were the Earth? But to
make the hole only 1 metre long, you have to remove almost the
entire planet, leaving only a very thin band round the equator, one
metre wide. So just maybe . . .
         Here comes the easy bit. Assuming that the radius really does not
                          Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 265



matter, we can work out the answer by considering the special case
when the hole is very narrow – in fact, when its width is zero.




                                             Special case of the
                                             problem.

    Now the volume of copper is equal to that of the entire sphere,
and the diameter of the sphere is 1 metre. So its radius is r ¼ 12, and its
volume is given by the famous formula

           4
        V ¼ pr3
           3
which equals p=6 when r ¼ 12.
    Ah, but how do we know that the answer doesn’t depend on the
radius? That’s a bit more complicated, and it uses more geometry. (Or
you can do it by calculus, if you know how.)




                                           Restoring the spherical caps
                                           to help the calculation.



    Put back the missing ‘spherical caps’ on the top and bottom.
Suppose that the radius of the sphere is r, and the radius of the
cylindrical hole is a. Then Pythagoras’s Theorem applied to the small
triangle at the top right tells us that

        r2 ¼ a2 þ ð12Þ2
266 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



so

         a2 ¼ r2  14 :

Now we need three volume formulas:

. The volume of a sphere of radius r is 43 pr3 .
. The volume of a cylinder of base radius a and height h is pa2 h.
. The volume of a spherical cap of height k in a sphere of radius
     r is 13 pk2 ð3r  kÞ.

Don’t worry, I had to look that last one up myself.
     The volume of copper required is the volume of the sphere,
minus that of the cylinder, minus that of two spherical caps, which is

         3pr  pa h  3pk ð3r  kÞ
         4 3     2    2  2


since there are two spherical caps. But h ¼ 1; k ¼ r  12 and a2 ¼ r2  14,
so the volume is
                                          2   
         3pr  p r  4            23p r  12 3r  12
         4 3      2  1


Doing the algebra, almost everything miraculously cancels, and all
that remains is p=6.


Digital Century
         123  45  67 þ 89 ¼ 100

This solution was found by the great English puzzle-creator, Henry
Ernest Dudeney, and can be found in his book Amusements in
Mathematics. There are lots of answers if you use four or more
arithmetical symbols.
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 267



Squaring the Square




                                           How Morón’s tiles
                                           make a rectangle.




                                               How Duijvestijn’s
                                               tiles make a square.

   You can also rotate or reflect these arrangements.


Ring a-Ring a-Ringroad
The difference is 20p metres, or roughly 63 metres, for roads on the
flat. It doesn’t depend on the length of the motorway, or how wiggly
it is, provided the curvature is gradual enough for ‘10 metres distance
between lanes’ to be unambiguous.
268 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet




                                   Data for a
                                   circular M25.

   Let’s start with an idealised version, where the M25 is a perfect
circle. If the anticlockwise lane has radius r, then the clockwise one
has radius r þ 10. Their circumferences are then 2pr and 2pðr þ 10Þ.
The difference is

       2pðr þ 10Þ  2pr ¼ 20p

which is independent of r.




                                                   A rectangular
                                                   motorway also creates
                                                   an excess
                                                   of 20.
   However, the M25 is not circular. For argument’s sake, try a
rectangle. Now the outer lane consists of four straight bits, which
match the inner lane exactly, plus four quarter-circles at the corners.
These extra arcs fit together to make a single circle of radius 10.
Again, we get an excess of exactly 20p.




                                     A non-convex polygon
                                     gives 20p as well.
    The same point holds for any ‘polygonal’ road – one composed of
straight lines, plus arcs of circles at corners. The straight-line parts
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 269



match; the arcs add up to one complete circle of radius 10. This is true
even when the polygon is not convex, such as the M-shape shown
above.* Now the outer lane has arcs that add up to one and a quarter
circles, and the inner lane has a quarter circle of its own. But this
quarter-turn is of opposite curvature, so it cancels out the excess
quarter-turn in the outer lane. The point is that any sufficiently
smooth curve can be approximated as closely as we wish by polygons,
so the excess is 20p in all cases.
    The same argument applies to runners on a curved track. In the
400 metres, runners start from ‘staggered’ positions, to make the
overall distance the same in each lane. The stagger between adjacent
lanes must be 2p times the width of a lane. This width is usually 1.22
metres, so the stagger should be 7.66 metres per lane – provided it is
applied on a straight section of the track. In practice the region where
the athletes start often includes part of a bend, so the numbers are a
bit different. The easy way to calculate them is to make sure that each
runner goes exactly
400 metres, which is what the rules actually state.


Magic Hexagon
The only solution (apart from rotations and reflections of it) is




                                          The only non-trivial magic
                                          hexagon.


    This magic hexagon was found independently by several people


*   It’s not true if the polygon crosses itself, as does the Suzuka racing
    circuit in Japan. But for some reason figure-of-eight orbital
    motorways don’t seem to have caught on.
270 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



between 1887 and 1958. If we try similar patterns of hexagons with n
cells along the edge instead of 3, then the only other case where a
magic hexagon (using consecutive numbers 1, . . . , n) exists is the
trivial pattern when n ¼ 1: a single hexagon containing the number
1. Charles W. Trigg explained why in 1964, by proving that the magic
constant must be

       9ðn4  2n3 þ 2n2  nÞ þ 2
               2ð2n  1Þ

which is an integer only when n ¼ 1 or 3.


Pentalpha
The star shape is designed to mislead. The important aspect of the
structure is which circles are two steps away from which, because
these are where each new counter starts and finishes. By focusing on
this we can draw a much simpler diagram:


                                       A transformed version of the
                                       puzzle.




   The rule for placing counters is now: place each new counter on
an empty circle and slide it to an adjacent empty circle. It is now
obvious how to cover nine circles. For example, place a counter on 1
and slide it to 0. Then place a counter on 2 and slide it to 1. Then
place a counter on 3 and slide it to 2. Continue in this way, placing
each new counter two empty dots away from the existing string of
counters.
   Copy these moves on the original diagram to solve the puzzle.
   In the second diagram, you can add new counters at either end,
so there are lots of solutions. But you can’t create more than one
connected chain of counters at any stage, because there are then at
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 271



least two gaps where no counters exist, and each gap leads to at least
one circle that can’t be covered.


How Old Was Diophantus?
Diophantus was 84 when he died. Let x be his age. Then
       x x x   x
        þ þ þ5þ þ4¼x
       6 12 7  2
So

       9
          x¼9
       84
and x = 84.


The Sphinx is a Reptile




                                      Four sphinxes make a
                                      bigger sphinx.



Langford’s Cubes

                                             Langford’s cubes
                                             with four colours.



Magic Stars
This arrangement – possibly rotated or reflected – is the only
solution.
272 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet




                                           Six-pointed
                                           magic star.



Curves of Constant Width
Surprisingly, the circle isn’t the only curve of constant width. The
simplest curve of constant width that is not a circle is an equilateral
triangle with rounded edges:




                                                     (Left) Constant-
                                                     width triangle.

                                                     (Right) Twenty-
                                                     pence coin.

   Each edge is an arc of a circle, with centre at the opposite vertex.
Two British coins, the 20p and 50p, are 7-sided curves of constant
width; this shape was chosen because it makes the coins suitable for
use in slot machines, but distinguishes them from other circular
coins worth different amounts – which is especially useful for the
visually impaired.


Connecting Cables
The main point is not to connect the dishwasher first, with a straight
cable. This isolates each of the other appliances from its socket, and
makes a solution impossible. If you connect the fridge and cooker
first, it’s then obvious how to hook up the dishwasher.
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 273




                                                     How to make
                                                     the connections.




Coin Swap
One solution is to successively swap the following pairs: HK, HE, HC,
HA, IL, IF, ID, KL, GJ, JA, FK, LE, DK, EF, ED, EB, BK. There are many
others.


The Stolen Car
Fenderbender paid out £900 for the car and an extra £100 to the
clergyman as change. He counted all his outgoings but forgot to
include the corresponding income. All other transactions cancel out,
so he lost £1,000.


Compensating Errors
The numbers were 1, 2 and 3. Then 1 þ 2 þ 3 ¼ 6 ¼ 16263. This is
the only solution for three positive whole numbers.
   With two numbers, the only possibility is 2 þ 2 ¼ 4 ¼ 262. With
four numbers, the only solution is 1 þ 1 þ 2 þ 4 ¼ 8 ¼ 16 16264.
   With more numbers, there are usually lots of solutions, but in
some exceptional cases there is just one solution. If the sum of k
positive whole numbers is equal to their product, and only one set of
k numbers has that property, then k is one of the numbers 2, 3, 4, 6,
24, 114, 174 and 444, or it is at least 13, 587, 782, 064. No examples
greater than that are known, but their possible existence remains
open.


River Crossing 2 – Marital Mistrust
A graphical solution is a bit messy to draw because it involves a
6-dimensional hypercube in husband1–husband2–husband3–wife1–
274 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



wife2–wife3 space. Fortunately there’s an alternative. Eliminating
unsuitable moves and using a bit of logic leads to a solution in 11
moves, which is the smallest possible number. Here the husbands are
A B C and the corresponding wives are
a b c.

                  This bank                                   In boat                              Direction                                 Far bank
....................................................................................................................................................................
                  ACac                                        Bb                                   ®                                         —
                  ACac                                        B                                    ¬                                         b
                  ABC                                         ac                                   ®                                         b
                  ABC                                         a                                    ¬                                         bc
                  Aa                                          BC                                   ®                                         bc
                  Aa                                          Bb                                   ¬                                         Cc
                  ab                                          AB                                   ®                                         Cc
                  ab                                          c                                    ¬                                         ABC
                  b                                           ac                                   ®                                         ABC
                  b                                           B                                    ¬                                         ACac
                  —                                           Bb                                   ®                                         ACac
....................................................................................................................................................................

There are minor variations on this solution in which various couples
are interchanged.


Wherefore Art Thou Borromeo?
In the second pattern, the two lower rings are linked. In the third
pattern, all three pairs are linked. In the fourth pattern, the top ring is
linked to the left one which in turn is linked to the right one.
         There are lots of four-ring versions. Here’s one:




                                                                                     A set of four
                                                                                     ‘Borromean’ rings.

         Analogous arrangements exist for any finite number of rings. It
has been proved that the Borromean property can’t be obtained using
                        Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 275



perfectly circular (and therefore flat) rings. This is a topological
phenomenon.


Percentage Play
The profit and loss do not cancel out. The bicycle he sold to Bettany
cost him £400 (he lost £100, which is 25% of £400). The one he sold
to Gemma cost him £240 (he gained £60, which is 25% of £240).
Overall, he paid £640 and received £600, so he lost £40.


New Merology
Assign the values

        E   F   G   H     I   L N   O    R  S     T   U   V    W   X    Z
        3   9   6   1    4   0 5   7   6 1    2   8   3   7   11   10

Then

             ZþEþRþO¼0
               OþNþE¼1
                 TþWþO¼2
        TþHþRþEþE¼3
          FþOþUþR¼4
           FþIþVþE¼5
             SþIþX¼6
        SþEþVþEþN¼7
         EþIþGþHþT¼8

                NþIþNþE¼9
                    T þ E þ N ¼ 10
        E þ L þ E þ V þ E þ N ¼ 11
        T þ W þ E þ L þ V þ E ¼ 12


Spelling Mistakes
There are four spelling mistakes, in the words ‘there’, ‘mistakes’, ‘in’
and ‘sentence’. The fifth mistake is the claim that there are five
mistakes, when there are really only four.
276 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



    But . . . this means that if the sentence is true, it has to be false,
but if it’s false, it has to be true. Oops.


Expanding Universe
Perhaps surprisingly, the Indefensible actually does get to the edge of
the universe . . . but it takes about 10434 years to do so. By then the
universe has grown to a radius of about 10437 light years.
    Let’s see why.
    At each stage, when the universe expands, the fraction of the
distance that the Indefensible has already covered doesn’t change.
That suggests that if we think about the fractions, we ought to be able
to find the answer more easily.
    In the first year the ship travels 1/1,000 of the distance to the
edge. In the next year it travels 1/2,000 of the distance. In the third
year it travels 1/3,000 of the distance, and so on. In the nth year it
travels 1/1,000n of the distance. So the total fraction travelled after n
years is
                                   
             1        1 1 1        1      1
                   1 þ þ þ þ ... þ    ¼       Hn
           1;000      2 3 4        n    1;000

which is why harmonic numbers are relevant. In particular, the
number of years required to reach the edge is whatever value of n first
makes this fraction bigger than 1 – that is, makes Hn bigger than
1,000. There is no known formula for the value of Hn in terms of n,
and it grows very slowly as n increases. However, it can be proved
that by making n large enough, Hn can be made as large as we wish –
and in particular, greater than 1. So the Indefensible does get to the
edge if n is sufficiently large.
    To find out how large, we use the hint. To make Hn > 1,000 we
require log n þ g > 1;000, so that n > e1;000g . So the number of years
required to reach the edge of the universe is very close to e999:423 ,
which is 10434 in round numbers. By then the universe will have
grown to n þ 1 thousand light years, which is near enough 10437 light
years.
    Initially the remaining distance keeps increasing each year, but
eventually the ship starts to catch up with the expanding edge of the
universe. Its ‘share’ of the expansion grows as it gets farther out, and
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 277



in the long run this beats the fixed expansion rate of 1,000 light years
per year of the edge of the universe. The ‘long run’ here is very long:
it takes about e999g ¼ 10433:61 years before the remaining distance
starts to decrease – roughly the first third of the voyage.


Family Occasion
The smallest possible number of party guests is seven: two small girls
and one boy, their father and mother, and their father’s father and
mother.


Don’t Let Go!
Your body plus the rope forms a closed loop. It is a topological
theorem that a knot cannot be created in a closed loop by deforming
it continuously, so the problem can never be solved if you pick up the
rope in the obvious ‘normal’ way. Instead, you must first tie a knot in
your arms. This may sound difficult, but anyone can do it: just fold
them across your chest. Now lean forward so that the hand that is on
top of an arm can reach over the arm to pick up one end of the rope,
and pick up the other end with the other hand. Unfold your arms,
and the knot appears.


Möbius and His Band
If you cut a Möbius band along the middle, it stays in one piece – see
the second limerick. The resulting band has a 3608 twist.
    If you cut a Möbius band one-third of the way across, you get two
linked bands. One is a Möbius band, the other (longer) one has a 3608
twist.
    If you cut a band with a 3608 twist along the middle, you get two
linked bands with 3608 twists.


Three More Quickies
(1) Five days. (Each dog digs a hole in five days.)

(2) The parrot is deaf.

(3) The usual answer is that one hemisphere of the planet is land,
and the other is water, so the continent and the island are
278 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



identical. But puzzles like this are easily ‘cooked’ by finding
loopholes in the conditions. For instance, maybe Nff lives on the
continent but its house is on the island, and Pff eats houses for
breakfast. Or on Nff-Pff, the land moves – after all, who knows
what happens on an alien world? Or . . .




                                         Nff and Pff on their
                                         home planet of Nff-Pff.



Miles of Tiles
I forgot to add an extra condition: the tiles should meet at their
corners. The corners of some might meet the edges of others. This
doesn’t change the answer, but it complicates the proof a little.




                                         I forgot this
                                         kind of thing.



Après-le-Ski
The cables cross at a height of 240 metres.
                        Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 279




                                             More generally . . .


    It’s simpler to tackle a more general problem, where the lengths
are as shown. By similar triangles,
        xþy y                       xþy x
           ¼            and            ¼
         a   c                       b   c
Adding, we get
                           
                      1 1           xþy
        ðx þ yÞ        þ        ¼
                      a b            c

Dividing by xþy, we obtain

        1 1 1
         þ ¼
        a b c


leading to

               ab
        c¼
              aþb
We notice that c does not depend on x or y, which is a good job since
the puzzle didn’t tell us those. We know that a ¼ 600, and
b ¼ 400, so

              6006400
        c¼            ¼ 240
                1000


Pick’s Theorem
The lattice polygon illustrated has B ¼ 21 and I ¼ 5, so its area is 14 12
square units.


Paradox Lost
I don’t think this one stands up to scrutiny. Both litigants are doing a
pick-and-mix – at one moment assuming that the agreement is valid,
280 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



but at another, assuming that the court’s decision can override the
agreement. But why do you take an issue like this to court? Because
the court’s job is to resolve any claimed ambiguities in the contract,
override the contract if need be, and tell you what to do. So if the court
orders the student to pay up, then he has to, and if the court says that
he doesn’t have to pay up, then Protagoras doesn’t have a leg to stand
on.


Six Pens




                                       12 panels
                                       making 6 pens.




Hippopotamian Logic
Therefore oak trees grow in Africa.
      Why? Suppose, on the contrary, that oak trees don’t grow in
Africa. Then squirrels hibernate in the winter, and hippos eat acorns.
Therefore I’ll eat my hat. But I won’t eat my hat, a contradiction.
Therefore (reductio ad absurdum) my assumption that oak trees don’t
grow in Africa must be false. So oak trees grow in Africa.


Pig on a Rope




                                         Six copies simplify
                                         the geometry.
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 281



To simplify the problem, make six copies of the field, with six copies
of the (shaded) region accessible to the pig. Then we want the shaded
circle to have half the area of the hexagon. The area of the circle is pr 2
where r is the radius. The hexagon has sides 100 metres long, so its
                 p             p                  p
area is 10;00063 3=2, or 15;000 3. So pr2 ¼ 15;000 3, and
             s       p 
                15;000 3
        r¼
                    p

which is about 90.9392 metres.


The Surprise Examination
I think that the Surprise Examination Paradox is a very interesting
case of something that looks like a paradox but isn’t. My reason is
that there is a logically equivalent statement, which is obviously true
– but totally uninteresting.
    Suppose that every morning the students announce confidently,
‘The test will be today.’ Then eventually they will do so on the day of
the actual test, at which point they will be able to claim that the test
was not a surprise.
    I don’t see any logical objection to this technique, but it’s
obviously a cheat. If you expect something to happen every day, then
of course you won’t be surprised when it does. My view – and I’ve
argued with enough mathematicians who didn’t agree with me, let
alone anybody else, so I’m aware that there’s room for differences of
opinion – is that the paradox is bogus. It is nothing more than this
obvious strategy, dressed up to look mysterious. The cheat is not
entirely obvious, because everything is intuited instead of being
acted upon, but it’s the same cheat.
    Let me sharpen the conditions by requiring the students to state,
each morning before school begins, whether they think the test will
be held that day. With this condition, in order for the students to
know that it can’t be on Friday, they have to leave themselves the
option of announcing on Friday morning that ‘It will be today.’ And
the same goes for Thursday, Wednesday, Tuesday and Monday. So
they have to say ‘It will be today’ five times in all – once per day. This
282 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



makes sense: if the students are allowed to revise their prediction
each day, then eventually they’ll be right.
    If we demand even the tiniest bit more, though, their strategy
falls to bits. For example, suppose that they’re allowed only one such
announcement. If Friday arrives and they haven’t used up their
guess, then they can make the announcement then. But if they have
used up their guess, they’re in trouble. Worse, they can’t wait until
Friday to use their guess, because the test might be on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday.
    In fact, if they are allowed four guesses, they’re still sunk. Only if
they are permitted five guesses can they guarantee to predict the
correct day. But any fool could do that.
    I’m proposing two things here. The less interesting one is that the
paradox hinges on what we mean by ‘surprise’. The more interesting
proposal is that whatever we mean by ‘surprise’, there are two
logically equivalent ways to state the students’ prediction strategy.
One – the usual presentation – seems to indicate a genuine paradox.
The other – describe the strategy in terms of actual actions, not
hypothetical ones – turns it into something correct but unsurprising,
destroying the element of paradox.
    Equivalently, we can up the ante by letting the teacher add
another condition. Suppose that the students have poor memories,
so that any work they do on a given evening to prepare for the test is
forgotten by the next evening. If, as the students claim, the test is not
going to be a surprise, then they ought to be able to get away with
very little homework: just wait until the evening before the test, then
cram, pass and forget. But the teacher, in her wisdom, knows that
this won’t work. If they don’t do their homework on Sunday evening,
the test could be on Monday, and if it is, they’ll fail. Ditto Tuesday
through Friday. So despite claiming never to be surprised by the test,
the students have to do five evenings of homework.


Antigravity Cone
The uphill motion is an illusion. As the cone moves in the ‘uphill’
direction, its centre of gravity moves downwards, because the slope
widens out and the cone is supported nearer to its two ends.
                       Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 283


                                                  Side view: as the cone
                                                  follows the arrow,
                                                  which points up the
                                                  slope, its centre of
                                                  gravity moves down
                                                  (black line).



What Shape is a Crescent Moon?




                                           Geometry of an
                                           illuminated sphere.

The left curve of the crescent is a semicircle, but the other edge is not
an arc of a circle. It is a ‘semiellipse’ – an ellipse cut in half along its
longest axis. The diagram shows the rays of the Sun, which we are
assuming to be parallel. In this view the Sun must be positioned some
distance behind the plane of the page to create the crescent. The light
and dark portions of the Moon are hemispheres, so the boundary
between them is a circle; in fact, it is where a plane at right angles to
the Sun’s rays cuts the sphere. We observe this circle at an angle. A
circle viewed at an angle is an ellipse – its hidden edge is drawn
dotted, and we see only the front half. (I’ve used grey shading to
show the dark part of the moon.)
    In reality the illumination becomes very faint near the boundary
between light and dark, and the Moon is a bit bumpy. So the shape is
not as clearly defined as this discussion suggests. You can also quibble
about how the circle is projected on to the retina if you so desire.
    The crescent shape formed by two circular arcs can sometimes be
seen in the sky – most dramatically during an eclipse of the Sun,
when the Moon partially overlaps the Sun’s disk. But now it is the
Sun, not the Moon, that looks like a crescent.
284 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



Famous Mathematicians
The odd famous mathematician out is Carol Vorderman – see below.

Pierre Boulez Modernist composer and conductor. Studied
mathematics at the University of Lyon but then switched to
music.

Sergey Brin Co-founder of GoogleÔ, with Larry Page. Computer
Science and Mathematics degree from University of Maryland.
Net worth estimated at $16.6 billion in 2007, making him the
26th-richest person in the world. The Google search engine is
based on mathematical principles.

Lewis Carroll Pseudonym of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson. Author
of Alice in Wonderland. Logician.

J. M. Coetzee South African author and academic, winner of the
2003 Nobel Prize in Literature. BA in Mathematics at the
University of Cape Town in 1961. Also BA in English, Cape
Town, 1960.

Alberto Fujimori President of Peru, 1990–2000. Holds a master’s
degree in mathematics from the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee.

Art Garfunkel Singer. Master’s in mathematics from Columbia
University. Started on his PhD, but stopped to pursue a career in
music.

Philip Glass Modern composer, ‘minimalist’ (now ‘post-
minimalist’) in style. Accelerated college programme in
Mathematics and Philosophy, University of Chicago, at the age
of fifteen.

Teri Hatcher Actor. Played Lois Lane in The New Adventures of
Superman and also starred in Desperate Housewives. Mathematics
and engineering major at DeAnza Junior College.

Edmund Husserl Philosopher. Mathematics PhD from Vienna in
1883.
                   Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 285



Michael Jordan Basketball player. Started as a mathematics
student at university but changed subject after his second year.

Theodore Kaczynski PhD in mathematics from the University of
Michigan. Retreated to the Montana foothills and became the
notorious ‘Unabomber.’ Sentenced to life imprisonment, with
no possibility of parole, for murder.

John Maynard Keynes Economist. MA and 12th Wrangler in
mathematics, Cambridge University.

Carole King Prolific pop songwriter of the 1960s, later also
became a singer. Dropped out after one year of a mathematics
degree to develop her musical career.

Emanuel Lasker Chess grandmaster, world chess champion 1894–
1921. Mathematics professor at Heidelberg University.

J. P. Morgan Banking, steel and railroad magnate. He was so good
at mathematics that the faculty of Göttingen University tried to
persuade him to become a professional.

Larry Niven Author of Ringworld and numerous other science
fiction bestsellers. Majored in mathematics.

Alexander Solzhenitsyn Winner of the 1970 Nobel Prize in
literature. Author of The Gulag Archipelago and other influential
literary works. Degree in mathematics and physics from the
University of Rostov.

Bram Stoker Author of Dracula. Mathematics degree from Trinity
College, Dublin.

Leon Trotsky Revolutionary. Studied mathematics at Odessa in
1897. Mathematical career terminated by imprisonment in
Siberia.
Eamon de Valera Prime Minister and later President of the
Republic of Ireland. Taught mathematics at university before
Irish independence.

Carol Vorderman Highly numerate co-presenter of television
286 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



series Countdown. Actually studied Engineering, so strictly
speaking does not belong in this list.

Virginia Wade Tennis player, winner of the 1977 Wimbledon
ladies’ singles title. Degree in mathematics and physics from
Sussex University.

Ludwig Wittgenstein Philosopher. Studied mathematical logic
with Bertrand Russell.

Sir Christopher Wren Architect, in particular of St Paul’s Cathedral.
Science and mathematics at Wadham College, Oxford.

A Puzzling Dissection
The area can’t change when the pieces are reassembled in a different
way. When we form the rectangle, the pieces don’t quite fit, and a
long, thin parallelogram is missing – I’ve exaggerated the effect to
show you what I mean.




                                                 Why the area isn’t 65.

    In fact, if we calculate the slopes of the slanting lines, the top-left
line has a slope of 2/5 = 0.4 and the top-right line has a slope of 3/8 =
0.375. These are different, and the first is slightly larger, so the top-
left line is slightly steeper than the top-right one. In particular, they
are not two pieces of the same straight line.
    The key lengths in this puzzle are 5, 8 and 13 – consecutive
Fibonacci numbers (page 98). You can create a similar puzzle using
other sets of consecutive Fibonacci numbers.


Nothing Up My Sleeve . . .
The topological point is that because your jacket has holes,* the
string is not actually linked to your body and the jacket. It just looks


*   Armholes, not moth holes.
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 287



that way. To see that the string is not linked to your body or the
jacket, imagine shrinking your body down to the size of a walnut, so
that it slides down your sleeve and into your pocket. Now you can
obviously pull the loop away, because your wrist is no longer
blocking the gap between sleeve and pocket. However, this method is
impractical, so we need a substitute.




                                                       Here’s how.


    Begin by pulling the end of the loop up the outside of your arm
inside the jacket sleeve, as shown by the arrow in the diagram on the
left. Pull out a loop at the top and draw it over your head to reach the
position shown in the right-hand diagram. Then pull the loop down
the outside of the other arm, inside the sleeve, as shown by the arrow
in the right-hand diagram. Pull it over your hand and then back up
through the sleeve. Now take hold of the string where it passes in
front of your head and push it down inside the front of the jacket.
The string pulls through the jacket armholes, and after a few wiggles
it drops down around your ankles and you can step out of it.


Nothing Down My Leg . . .
After the moves that solve the previous problem, the string ends up
looped around your waist, and it is still looped around your arm. So
you now follow a similar sequence of moves again, with the trousers
instead of the jacket: pass a loop down the trouser leg on the side
opposite the pocket with the hand in it, over the foot, back up the
trouser leg – and finally remove the string down the other trouser leg.
All of this is enormously undignified, and thus highly amusing to
spectators. Topology can be fun.
288 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



Two Perpendiculars
Neither Euclidean theorem is wrong. Mine is.
    The mistake is the assumption that P and Q are different points.
In fact, P and Q coincide – this follows from Euclid’s two theorems,
and is highly plausible if you draw an accurate picture.


May Husband and Ay . . .




                                              A 15-move
                                              solution.

The smallest number of moves is 15. The path shown, and its
reflection about the diagonal, are the only solutions. (Remember –
each square is visited exactly once; that is, the path cannot cross itself.)


What Day is It?
Today is Saturday. (As I told you right at the start, the conversation
took place yesterday.) Darren’s answers imply that the day of the
conversation is exactly one of Friday, Monday or Thursday. Delia’s
imply that it is Saturday, Sunday or Friday. The only common day is
Friday. So when the conversation took place, it was Friday.


Logical or Not?
The logic is wrong. If the weather is bad, then pigs don’t fly. As a
consequence, we don’t know whether they have wings. So we don’t
know whether to carry an umbrella.
    It may seem strange that a deduction can be illogical when – as
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 289



here – the conclusion is entirely sensible. Actually, this is very
common. For example:

       2 þ 2 ¼ 22 ¼ 262 ¼ 4

is nonsense as far as logic goes, but it gives the right answer. All
mathematicians know that you can give false proofs of correct
statements. What you can’t do – if mathematics is logically
consistent, as we fervently hope – is give correct proofs of false
statements.


A Question of Breeding
We are told that Catt breeds pigs.
   Hamster does not breed pigs, hamsters, dogs or zebras. So he
breeds cats.
   Now, Dogge breeds either hamsters or zebras; Pigge breeds dogs
hamsters or zebras; Zebra breeds either dogs or hamsters. Since the
namesake of Zebra’s animals breeds hamsters, Zebra must breed dogs.
Therefore Dogge breeds hamsters, so Pigge breeds zebras.


Fair Shares
Here’s Steinhaus’s method. Let the three people be Arthur, Belinda
and Charlie.

(1) Arthur cuts the cake into three pieces (which he thinks are all
fair, hence subjectively equal).

(2) Belinda must either
    . pass (if she thinks that at least two pieces are fair) or
    . label two pieces (which she thinks are unfair) as being
        ‘bad’.

(3) If Belinda passed, then Charlie chooses a piece (which he
thinks is fair). Then Belinda chooses a piece (which she thinks is
fair). Finally, Arthur takes the last piece.

(4) If Belinda labelled two pieces as ‘bad’, then Charlie is offered
the same options as Belinda – pass, or label two pieces ‘bad’. He
takes no notice of Belinda’s labels.
290 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



(5) If Charlie did nothing in step 4, then the players choose
pieces in the order Belinda, Charlie, Arthur (using the same
strategy as in step 3.)

(6) Otherwise, both Belinda and Charlie have labelled two pieces
as ‘bad’. There must be at least one piece that they both consider
‘bad’. Arthur takes that one. (He thinks that all the pieces are fair,
so he can’t complain.)

(7) The other two pieces are reassembled into a heap. (Charlie
and Belinda both think that the result is at least two-thirds of the
cake.) Now Charlie and Belinda play I-cut-you-choose on the
heap, to share what’s left between themselves (thereby getting
what they each judge to be a fair share).

The Sixth Deadly Sin
In the early 1960s John Selfridge and John Horton Conway
independently found an envy-free method of cake division for three
players. It goes like this:

(1) Arthur cuts the cake into three pieces, which he considers to
be ‘fair’ – of equal value to him.

(2) Belinda must either
    . pass (if she thinks that two or more pieces are tied for
        largest) or
    . trim (the largest) piece (to make the two the same). Any
        trimmings are called leftovers and set aside.

(3) Charlie, Belinda and Arthur, in that order, choose a piece
(one they think is largest or equal largest). If Belinda did not pass
in step 2, she must choose the trimmed piece unless Charlie
chose it first.

At this stage, the part of the cake other than the leftovers has been
divided into three pieces in an envy-free manner—a ‘partial envy-free
allocation’.

(4) If Belinda passed at step 2, there are no leftovers and we are
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 291



done. If not, either Belinda or Charlie took the trimmed piece.
Call this person the ‘non-cutter’, and the other one of the two
the ‘cutter’. The cutter divides the leftovers into three pieces
(that he/she considers equal).

Arthur has an ‘irrevocable advantage’ over the non-cutter, in the
following sense. The non-cutter received the trimmed piece, and
even if he/she gets all the leftovers, Arthur still thinks that he/she has
no more than a fair share, because he thought that the original pieces
were all fair. So however the leftovers are now divided, Arthur will not
envy the non-cutter.

(5) The three pieces of leftovers are chosen by the players in the
order non-cutter, Arthur, cutter. (Each chooses the largest piece,
or one of the equal largest, among those available.)

The non-cutter chooses from the leftovers first, so has no reason to be
envious. Arthur does not envy the non-cutter because of his
irrevocable advantage; he does not envy the cutter because he
chooses before he/she does. The cutter can’t envy anybody since he/
she was the one who divided the leftovers.
    Recently, Steven Brams, Alan Taylor and others have found very
complicated envy-free methods for any number of people.
    When it comes to sharing cakes, avoiding the second deadly sin*
is more tricky, in my experience.


Weird Arithmetic
The result is correct, though as teacher said, you should cancel 9 from
the top and the bottom to simplify it to 25. But Henry’s presumed
method leaves a lot to be desired.
    For instance,

        3 8 38
         6 ¼
        4 5 45
is wrong.




*   Gluttony.
292 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



    So when does his method work? An easy way to find one more
solution is to turn Henry’s upside down:

         4 5 45
          6 ¼
         1 8 18
But there are other solutions. With the stated limits on the number of
digits, we are trying to solve the equation

         a c 10a þ c
          6 ¼
         b d 10b þ d
which boils down to

         acð10b þ dÞ ¼ bdð10a þ cÞ

where a, b, c and d can each be any digit from 1 to 9 inclusive.
    There are 81 trivial solutions where a ¼ b and c ¼ d. Aside from
these, there are 14 solutions, where (a, b, c, d) ¼ (1, 2, 5, 4), (1, 4, 8, 5),
(1, 6, 4, 3), (1, 6, 6, 4), (1, 9, 9, 5), (2, 1, 4, 5), (2, 6, 6, 5), (4, 1, 5, 8),
(4, 9, 9, 8), (6, 1, 3, 4), (6, 1, 4, 6), (6, 2, 5, 6), (9, 1, 5, 9) and (9, 4, 8, 9).
These form seven pairs (a, b, c, d) and (b, a, d, c), corresponding to
turning the fractions upside down.


How Deep is the Well?
The depth of the well is

         s ¼ 12 gt2 ¼ 12 10ð6Þ2 ¼ 180 metres ¼ 590 feet

which agrees very well with what the Time Team measured (about
550 feet) when you take into account the difficulty of timing the fall
by hand. A more accurate figure for g is 9:8 m s2 , leading to a depth of
176 metres or 577 feet. Presumably the exact time was slightly less
than 6 seconds.
   Yes, the well really was that deep. How did they dig it, so long
ago? The mind boggles.


McMahon’s Squares
The 24 tiles can be assembled as shown. There are 17 other solutions,
plus rotations and reflections.
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 293




                                                 One of the 18 basically
                                                 different solutions.

    One feature of the tiles helps us work out how to assemble them.
Choose a border colour, say grey. There are four tiles that have two
blue triangles opposite each other and no other blue triangles. Their
remaining triangles are grey/grey, black/black, white/white and
black/white. The only way to fit these tiles in is to stack four of them
together across the narrow width of the rectangle:




                                The four tiles like the left-hand
                                one have to stack together.
                                The white triangles can be any
                                combination of black and white.

    There are still lots of ways to proceed, but this observation helps
to restrict the possibilities. There are 18 basically different solutions,
which lead to 216 solutions altogether by swapping colours, rotating
the picture or reflecting it. Note the stack in the third column of the
sample solution above.


Archimedes, You Old Fraud!
Let’s say that Archimedes can exert a force sufficient to lift his own
weight, call it 100 kg. The mass of the Earth is about 661024 kg. To
keep the analysis simple, suppose that the pivot is 1 metre from the
Earth. Then the law of the lever tells us that distance from the pivot
to Archimedes is 661022 metres, and his lever is 1 þ 661022 metres
long – about 1.6 million light years, or about two-thirds of the way to
294 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



the Andromeda Galaxy. If Archimedes now moves his end of the
lever one metre, the Earth moves 1=ð661022 Þ ¼ 1:6661023 metres.
    Now, a proton has a diameter of 1015 metres—
    Yes, but it still moves, dammit!
    True. But suppose that instead of using this huge and improbable
apparatus, Archimedes stands on the surface of the Earth and jumps.
For every metre he goes up, the Earth moves 1:6661023 metres down
(action/reaction). Jumping has exactly the same effect as his
hypothetical lever. So the place to stand is on the Earth – but you
don’t stand still.


The Missing Symbol
Well, the symbols þ; ; 6; and7 don’t work, because 4 þ 5 and 465
are too big, and 4  5 and 475 are too small. Neither does the square
          p             p
root sign , because 4 5 ¼ 8:94 and that’s too big as well.
    Give up? How about the decimal point, 4.5?


Where There’s a Wall, There’s a Way



                                                      How to make
                                                      the wall.

    Rotation and reflection yield three other solutions. The compo-
nent shapes are called tetrahexes.


Connecting Utilities
No, you can’t. As stated – and without ‘cooking’ the puzzle by, say,
working on a surface that isn’t a plane, passing cables through a
house, whatever – the puzzle has no solution.
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 295




                                                 A cheat that works by
                                                 passing a cable
                                                 through a house.

   If you experiment, you’ll soon become convinced that it’s
impossible – but mathematicians require proof. To find one, we first
connect things up without worrying about crossings, like this:




                                      Can this be redrawn without
                                      crossings?

   While we’re at it, I’ve replaced the buildings by dots.
   Now, suppose that we could redraw this picture, keeping all the
connections at the dots, to eliminate the crossings. Then the lines
would form a kind of map in the plane. This map would have E ¼ 9
edges (the nine connections) and V ¼ 6 vertices (the six dots). Euler’s
formula for maps (page 177) tells us that if F is the number of faces,
then

       FEþV ¼2

so F  9 þ 6 ¼ 2 and F ¼ 5. One of these faces is infinitely large and
forms the outside of the whole diagram.
   Now we count the edges in another way. Each face has a
boundary formed by a loop of edges. You can check that the possible
loops in the diagram contain either 4 or 6 distinct edges, nothing
296 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



else. So there are six possibilities for the number of edges in the five
faces:

         4   4   4   4   4
         4   4   4   4   6
         4   4   4   6   6
         4   4   6   6   6
         4   6   6   6   6
         6   6   6   6   6

which respectively total 20, 22, 24, 26, 28 and 30. But every edge
forms the border between two faces, so the number of edges has to be
half of one of these numbers: 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 or 15.
    However, we already know that there should be 9 faces. This is a
contradiction, so we can’t redraw the diagram to have no crossings.
    People often claim that ‘You can’t prove a negative.’ In
mathematics, you most certainly can.


Don’t Get the Goat
No, there isn’t. The contestant doubles their chance of success by
changing their mind. But this is true only under the stated
assumptions. For example, suppose that the host (who knows where
the car is, remember) offers the contestant the opportunity to change
their mind only when they have correctly chosen the door with the
car behind it. In this extreme case, they always lose if they change
their mind. At the other extreme, if he offers the contestant the
opportunity to change their mind only when they have chosen a
door with a goat behind it, they always win.
    Fine – but what if my original assumptions are valid. The fifty–
fifty argument then looks convincing, but it’s wrong. The reason is
that the host’s procedure does not make the odds fifty–fifty.
    When the contestant makes their initial choice, the probability
that they have the right door is one in three. So on average and in the
long run, the car is behind that particular door one time in three.
Nothing that happens subsequently can change that. (Unless the
television people surreptitiously move the prizes . . . OK, let’s assume
that doesn’t happen either.)
    After a goat is revealed, the contestant is left with two doors. The
car must be behind one of them (the host never reveals the car). One
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 297



time in three that door is the one that the contestant has chosen. The
other two times out of three, it must be behind the other door. So, if
you don’t change your mind, you win the car one time in three. If
you do, you win it two times in three – twice the chance.
   The trouble with such reasoning is that unless you’ve spent a lot
of time learning probability theory, it’s not always clear what works
and what doesn’t. You can experiment using dice to decide where the
car goes: 1 or 2 puts it behind the first door, 3 or 4 behind the second,
5 or 6 behind the third, say. If you try this twenty or thirty times, it
soon becomes clear that changing your mind really does improve the
chance of success. I once got an
e-mail from some people who had been arguing about this problem
in the pub, until one of them got out his laptop and programmed it
to simulate a million attempts. ‘Don’t change your mind’ succeeded
on roughly 333,300 occasions. ‘Do change your mind’ succeeded on
the remaining 666,700 occasions. It’s fascinating that we live in a
world where you can do this simulation in a few minutes in a pub.
Nearly all of which is taken up writing the computer program – the
actual sums take less than a second.
   Still not convinced? Sometimes people see the light when the
problem is taken to extremes. Take a normal pack of 52 playing cards,
held face down. Ask a friend to pull a card from the pack, without
looking at it, and lay it on the table. They win if that card is the ace of
spades (car) and lose otherwise (goat). So now we have one car and 51
goats, behind 52 doors (cards). But you now pick up the remaining 51
cards, holding them so that you can see their faces but your friend
can’t. Now you discard 50 of those cards, none being the ace of
spades. One card remains in your hand; one is on the table. Is it really
true that each of these two cards has a fifty–fifty chance of being the
ace of spades? So why were you so careful to hang on to that
particular card out of the 51 you started with? Clearly you have a big
advantage over your friend. They got to choose one card, without
seeing its face. You had a choice of 51 cards, and you did see their
faces. They have one chance in 52 of being right; you have 51
chances. This is a fair game? Pull the other one!
298 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



All Triangles are Isosceles
The mistake is the innocent assertion that X is inside the triangle. If
you draw the picture accurately, it’s not. And it turns out that exactly
one of the points D and E is outside the triangle, too. In this particular
case, D is not between A and C. But the other point is ‘inside’ the
triangle—well, on its edge, but not outside it. Here E lies between B
and C. This diagram makes it clear what I mean:




                                                 The correct picture.


    Now the argument collapses. We still find that CE ¼ CD and DA
¼ EB (steps 5 and 9). But in step 10, CA ¼ CD  DA, not CD þ DA.
However, CB is still CE þ EB. So we can’t conclude that lines CA and
CB are equal.
    Fallacies like this one explain why mathematicians are so
obsessive about hidden logical assumptions in proofs.


Square Year
We are looking for squares either side of 2001. A little experiment
reveals that 442 ¼ 1936, and 452 ¼ 2025. With these figures, Betty’s
father was born in 1936  44 ¼ 1892 (so he died in 1992), and Alfie was
born in 2025  45 ¼ 1980.
   To rule out any other answers: the previous possible date for
Betty’s father would be 432  43 ¼ 1806, so he would have died in
1906, making Betty well past retirement age. The next possible date
for Alfie would be 462  46 ¼ 2070, so he wouldn’t get born in 2001.
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 299



Infinite Wealth
Whatever amount you win, it will be finite (unless the game goes on
for ever, with you always tossing tails, in which case you win an
infinite amount of cash, but you have to wait infinitely long to get
it). So it’s silly to pay an infinite entry fee. The correct deduction is
that whatever finite entry fee you pay, your expected winnings are
bigger. Your chance of a big win is of course very small, but the win is
so huge that it compensates you for the tiny chance of success.
    But that still seems silly, and this is where the mathematicians of
the time started scratching their heads (and very likely their tails too,
though we don’t mention such things in polite company). The main
source of trouble is that the expected winnings form a divergent series
– one with no well-defined sum – which may not make a great deal of
sense.
    As a practical matter, the sums involved are limited by two
features that the simple mathematical model fails to take into
account: the largest amount that the bank can actually pay, and the
length of time available to play the game – at most one human
lifetime. If the bank has only £220 available, for instance, which is
£1,048,576, then you are justified in risking £20. If the bank has £250
available, which is £1,125,899,906,842,624 – a little over a quad-
rillion pounds, which exceeds the annual Gross Global Product, then
you are justified in risking £50.
    There is a more philosophical point: how sensible the long-term
average winnings (expectation) actually is when the ‘long term’ is far
longer than any player can actually play for. If you are playing
against a bank with £250 in its coffers, it will typically take you 250
attempts to make the big win that justifies you spending £50, let
alone a much larger amount. Human decisions about risk are subtler
than the mindless computation of long-term expectations, and the
subtleties are important exactly when the gain (or loss) is very big but
its probability is very small.
     A related point is the relevance of long-term averages over
numerous trials, if in practice you only get to play once, or just a few
times. Then you have an extraordinarily small chance of a big win,
and the pragmatic decision is not to throw money at something so
unlikely.
300 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



    On the other hand, in cases where the expectation converges to a
finite sum, it may make more sense. Suppose that you win £n if the
first toss of a head is on the nth throw. Now the expectation is

          1     1      1      1
        16 þ 26 2 þ 36 3 þ 46 4 þ . . .
          2    2      2      2
which converges to 2. So here you should pay £2 to break even,
which seems fair enough.


What Shape is a Rainbow?
The arcs are parts of circles. For a given colour, the arc concerned is very
thin. All the circles involved have the same centre – which is often below
the horizon. The interesting question is – why? The answer turns out to
be distinctly complicated, though very elegant. Teacher was right to
direct our attention to the colours, though she did miss an opportunity
to do some really neat geometry.
    Consider light of a single wavelength (colour), and look at a
raindrop in cross-section. Raindrops are spheres, so in section we get
a circle. A ray of light from the Sun hits the front of the drop, is
refracted (bent through an angle) by the water, reflects off the back of
the drop, and is refracted a second time as it leaves the drop and
heads back roughly the way it came.




        (Left) The path of one ray. (Right) Many rays.

    That’s what happens to one ray, but in reality there are lots of
them. Rays that are very close together usually hit the same drop, but
turn through slightly different angles. But there is a focusing effect,
and most of the light comes back out along a single ‘critical
direction’. Bearing in mind the spherical geometry of the drop, the
                       Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 301



end result is that effectively each drop emits a cone of light of the
chosen colour. The axis of the cone joins the drop to the Sun. The
vertex angle of the cone is about 428, for a raindrop, but it depends
on the colour of the light.
    When an observer looks at the sky, in the direction of the rain,
she observes light only from those drops whose cones meet her eye. A
little geometry shows that these drops themselves lie on a cone,
whose tip is at her eye, and whose axis is the line joining her eye to
the Sun. Again, the vertex angle is about 428, depending on the
colour of the light.




        The eye receives a cone of light.

    If you place a cone to your eye and sight along it, what you see is
the edge of its circular base. More accurately, the directions of the
incoming light are perceived as if the light were being emitted by the
circular base. So the upshot is that the eye ‘sees’ a circular arc. The arc
is not up there in the sky: it is an illusion, caused by the directions of
the incoming light rays.
    Usually, the eye sees only part of this circular arc. If the Sun is
high in the sky, most of the arc is below the horizon. If the Sun is low,
the eye sees almost a semicircle. From an aircraft a complete circle
can sometimes be seen. If the rain is nearby, the arc may appear to be
in front of other parts of the landscape. The arc is often partial – you
see the returning light only when there’s rain in that direction.
    Because different colours of light lead to different vertex angles
for the cone, each colour appears on a slightly different arc, but they
all have the same centre. So we see ‘parallel’ arcs of colours.
    Sometimes you can see a second rainbow, outside the first. This is
302 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



formed in a similar way, but the light bounces more times before
coming back out of the drop. The vertex angle of the cone is
different, and the colours are in reverse order. The sky is brighter
inside the main rainbow, very dark between this and the ‘secondary’
rainbow, and medium-dark outside that. Again, all this can be
explained in terms of the geometry of the light rays. René Descartes
did that in 1637.
    A really informative website is en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rainbow


Alien Abduction
Each alien is going after the pig that initially is nearest to it. If they
chase the other pig, they will soon catch it.
    Why? The way to catch a pig is to drive it into a corner. If the
position looks like the next picture, and it is the pig’s turn to move, it
will be abducted. However, if it is the alien’s turn to move, the pig can
escape.




                                  How to catch your pig
                                  – provided the pig has to move.

    Which of these happens depends on the parity (odd or even) of
the distance (in moves) from alien to pig. If the pig is an even number
of moves away – as it is if each alien goes for the pig it is initially
facing – then the pig always escapes. If it is odd – as it is if the aliens
switch pigs – then the pig can be driven into a corner and abducted.


Disproof of the Riemann Hypothesis
The argument is logically correct. However, it doesn’t disprove the
Riemann Hypothesis! The information given is contradictory: it
implies that an elephant has won Mastermind, and also that it has
not. We can now prove the Riemann Hypothesis false by contra-
diction:
                       Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 303



(1) Assume, on the contrary, that the Riemann Hypothesis is
true.

(2) Then an elephant has won Mastermind.

(3) But an elephant has not won Mastermind.

(4) This is a contradiction. So our assumption that the Riemann
Hypothesis is true is wrong.

(5) Therefore the Riemann Hypothesis is false.

The same argument proves that the Riemann Hypothesis is true, of
course.


Murder in the Park




          The two possible topological types of path.

   Topologically speaking, there are just two cases to consider.
Either the butler went to the north of Y on his way to X (left-hand
diagram) or he went to the south (right-hand diagram). The
gamekeeper must then have gone to the south (respectively north) of
X on his way to Y.
   The tracks of the youth and the grocer’s wife must then be as
shown, perhaps with additional wiggles. In the first case, the grocer’s
wife’s path from C to F cuts off the youth’s path from the part of the
park that contains the body. In fact, only she and the butler could
have approached the place where Hastings’s body lay. The same is
true in the second case. Since the butler has a confirmed alibi, the
murderer must have been the grocer’s wife.
304 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



The Cube of Cheese
The corners of the hexagon lie on various midpoints of sides of the
cube, like this:




                                            Hexagonal slice of a cube.



Drawing an Ellipse – and More?




        The pencil draws arcs of various ellipses.

When the pencil is in the position shown on the left, the length of
string ACþCB is constant, so the pencil moves as if you had looped a
shorter string round A and B. Therefore it draws an arc of an ellipse
with foci A and B. When it moves to a position like the one on the
right, it draws an arc of an ellipse with foci A and C. The complete
curve therefore consists of six arcs of ellipses, joined together. Since
basically this isn’t new, mathematicians aren’t (terribly) interested.
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 305



The Milk Crate Problem
The milkman is correct for 1, 4, 9, 16, 25 and 36 bottles, but wrong
for 49 and any larger square number.
    If you think about this the right way, it’s obvious that when the
number of bottles gets sufficiently large, the square lattice packing
can’t possibly be the best. (What is the best is horribly difficult to
work out, and nobody knows.) The square lattice must fail for a large
number of bottles, because a hexagonal lattice packs bottles more
closely than a square one. When there aren’t too many bottles, ‘edge
effects’ near the walls of the crate stop you exploiting this fact to
make the crate smaller, but as the numbers go up the edge effects
become negligible.
    It so happens that the break-even point is close to 49 bottles. And
it has been proved that 49 bottles of unit diameter can fit inside a
square whose side is very slightly less than 7 units. The difference is
too small to be seen by the naked eye, but you can easily see big
regions of hexagonally packed circles.




        (Left) 49 unit bottles in a 767 square. (Right) How to fit the same
        bottles into a slightly smaller square.

    Incidentally, this example shows that a rigid packing – one in
which no single circle can move – need not be the closest packing
possible. The square lattice is rigid for any square number of bottles
inside a tightly fitting square crate. Or, indeed, on the infinite plane.


Road Network
The shortest road network introduces two new junctions and makes
the roads meet there at exactly 1208 to each other. The same layout
306 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



rotated by 908 is the only other option. The total length here is
        p
100ð1 þ 3Þ ¼ 273 km, roughly:




                                       The shortest network.




Tautoverbs
. No news is no news. (Experts consider this the smallest but
    most perfectly formed tautoverb, a kind of tautohaiku.)
.   The bigger they are, the bigger they are.
.   Nothing ventured, nothing lost.
.   Too many cooks cook too much.
.   You cannot have your cake and eat it too, unless you do them
    in that order. What’s difficult is to eat your cake and have it
    too.
.   A watched pot never boils over. (Unless it’s custard.) The time
    taken for a liquid to boil is not influenced by the presence of
    an observer, except in certain esoteric forms of quantum field
    theory. It merely seems longer for psychological reasons. Do
    not be deceived.
.   If pigs had wings, the laws of aerodynamics would still stop
    them getting off the ground. I mean, let’s be sensible. The
    porcithopter is not technologically feasible.

Scrabble Oddity
       TWELVE ¼ 1 þ 4 þ 1 þ 1 þ 4 þ 1
                      Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 307



Dragon Curve
Dragon curves can be made by repeatedly folding a strip of paper in
half – always folding the same way – and then opening it out to make
all folds into right angles.




        Making dragon curves by paper-folding.

    These curves determine a fractal (page 189). In fact, the infinite
limit is a space-filling curve (page 83), but the region it fills has a
complicated, dragon-like shape. The sequence of right (R) and left (L)
turns in the curve goes like this:

Step 1 R

Step 2 R R L

Step 3 R R L R R L L

Step 4 R R L R R L L R R R L L R L L

In fact, there is a simple pattern: each sequence is formed from the
previous one by placing an extra R at the end, followed by the reverse
of the previous sequence with R’s and L’s swapped. I’ve marked the
extra R in the middle in bold.
    The dragon curve was discovered by John Heighway, Bruce Banks
and William Harter – all physicists at NASA – and was mentioned in
Martin Gardner’s Mathematical Games’ column in Scientific American
in 1967. It has lots of intriguing features – see en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Dragon_curve

Counterflip
Assume that there is an odd number of black counters—so in
particular, there exists at least one of them. As play progresses,
counters that are removed create gaps, breaking the row of counters
into connected pieces, which I’ll call chains. We start with one chain.
308 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



   I claim that any chain with an odd number of black counters can
be removed. Here’s a method that always works. (The sample game
doesn’t always follow it, so other methods work too.)
    Starting from one end of the chain, find the first black counter. I
claim that if you flip that counter, then there are three possibilities:

(1) The chain originally consisted of one isolated black counter,
and when you flip it it is removed, with no effect on any other
counters.

(2) You now have a single shorter chain having an odd number
of black counters.

(3) You now have two shorter chains, each having an odd
number of black counters.

If this claim is true, then you can repeat the same procedure on the
shorter chains. The number of chains may grow, but they get shorter
at each step. Eventually they all become so short that we reach case 1
and they can be removed entirely.
   The claim is proved by seeing what happens in three cases of a
single chain, which exhaust the possibilities:

(1) The chain concerned consists of a single black counter. It has
no neighbours, so when it is flipped it disappears.

(2) The chain has a black counter at one end. Flipping the end
counter results in a shorter chain which has an odd number of
black counters.

                                       Grey counters may be either
                                       black or white. The black
                                       counter on the end disappears,
                                       and its neighbour (here shown
                                       white) changes colour. The
                                       overall change in the number of
                                       black counters is either 0 or 2,
                                       so an odd number of black
                                       counters remains.

(3) The chain has white counters at both ends. Flipping the first
black counter from one end (it doesn’t matter which) results in
                     Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet // 309



two shorter chains. One has a single black counter (which is odd)
and the other has an odd number of black counters.
                                                 The first black counter
                                                 (from the left)
                                                 disappears, and its
                                                 neighbours (one white,
                                                 one grey – i.e. black or
                                                 white) change colour.
                                                 Two chains are created;
                                                 one has one black
                                                 counter, the other has
                                                 an odd number of black
                                                 counters.

   It does matter which black counter you flip. For instance, if the
chain has at least four counters, with three black counters next to one
another and the rest white, then it is a mistake to flip the middle
black counter. If you do, you get at least one chain containing no
black counters at all, so this chain cannot be removed.


                                    Oops . . .

   To complete the analysis, here’s why the puzzle can’t be solved if
the initial number of black counters is even:

(1) If there are no black counters (zero is even!) you can’t get
started.

(2) If the initial number of black counters is even (and non-zero),
then whichever black counter you remove, at least one shorter
chain is created that also has an even number of black counters.
Repeating this process eventually leads to a chain with no black
counters but at least one white one. This chain cannot be
removed since there is no place to start.

Spherical Sliced Bread
All slices have exactly the same amount of crust.
    At first sight this seems unlikely, but slices near the top and
bottom are more slanted than those near the middle, so they have
310 // Professor Stewart’s Cunning Crib Sheet



more crust than you might think. It turns out that the slope exactly
compensates for the smaller size of the slices.
    In fact, the great Greek mathematician Archimedes discovered
that the surface area of a slice of a sphere is equal to that of the
corresponding slice of a cylinder into which the sphere fits. It is
obvious that parallel slices of a cylindrical loaf, of equal thickness, all
have the same amount of crust . . . since they are all the same shape
and size.




        The surface area of the spherical band (pale blue) is the same as
        that of the corresponding band on a tightly fitting cylinder.


Mathematical Theology
I asked you to start from 2 þ 2 ¼ 5 and prove that 1 ¼ 1 and also that
1 ¼ 42. There are lots of valid answers (infinitely many, in fact). Here
are two that work:

. Since 2 þ 2 ¼ 4, we deduce that 4 ¼ 5. Double both sides to get
    8 ¼ 10. Subtract 9 from each side to get 1 ¼ 1. Square both
    sides to get 1 ¼ 1.
.   Since 2 þ 2 ¼ 4, we deduce that 4 ¼ 5. Subtract 4 from each
    side to get 0 ¼ 1. Multiply both sides by 41 to get 0 ¼ 41. Add
    1 to each side to get 1 ¼ 42.
