Sliced Fingers
Here’s how to wrap a loop of string around somebody’s fingers –
your own or those of a ‘volunteer’ – so that when it is pulled tight
it seems to slice through the fingers. The trick is striking because
we know from experience that if the string is genuinely linked
with the fingers then it shouldn’t slip off. More precisely,
imagine that your fingers all touch a fixed surface – thereby
preventing the string from sliding off their tips. The trick is
equivalent to removing the loop from the holes created by your
fingers and the surface. If the loop were really linked through
those holes, you couldn’t remove it at all, so it has to appear to be
linked without actually being linked.
     If by mistake it is linked, it really would have to slice through
your fingers, so be careful.




                                                 How (not) to slice
                                                 your fingers off.


   Why is this a mathematical trick? The connection is
topology, a branch of mathematics that emerged over the past
150 years, and is now central to the subject. Topology is about
properties such as being knotted or linked – geometrical features
that survive fairly drastic transformations. Knots remain knotted
even if the string is bent or stretched, for instance.
                                           Turnip for the Books // 9



      Make a loop from a 1-metre length of string. Hook one end
over the little finger of the left hand, twist, loop it over the next
finger, twist in the same direction, and keep going until it passes
behind the thumb (left picture). Now bring it round in front of
the thumb, and twist it over the fingers in reverse order (right
picture). Make sure that when coming back, all the twists are in
the opposite direction to what they were the first time.
      Fold the thumb down to the palm of the hand, releasing the
string. Pull hard on the free loop hanging from the little finger
. . . and you can hear it slice through those fingers. Yet,
miraculously, no damage is done.


...........................................
      Unless you get a twist in the wrong direction somewhere.