The Four-Colour Theorem
Problems that are easy to state can sometimes be very hard to
answer. The four-colour theorem is a notorious example. It all
began in 1852 with Francis Guthrie, a graduate student at
University College, London. Guthrie wrote a letter to his younger
brother Frederick, containing what he thought would be a simple
little puzzle. He had been trying to colour a map of the English
counties, and had discovered that he could do it using four
colours, so that no two adjacent counties were the same colour.
He wondered whether this fact was special to the map of
England, or more general. ‘Can every map drawn on the plane be
coloured with four (or fewer) colours so that no two regions
having a common border have the same colour?’ he wrote.
     It took 124 years to answer him, and even now, the answer
relies on extensive computer assistance. No simple conceptual
proof of the four-colour theorem – one that can be checked step
by step by a human being in less than a lifetime – is known.




       Colouring England’s counties with four colours – one solution
       out of many.

    Frederick Guthrie couldn’t answer his brother’s question, but
he ‘knew a man who could’ – the famous mathematician
Augustus De Morgan. However, it quickly transpired that De
Morgan couldn’t, as he confessed in October of the same year in a
                                   The Four-Colour Theorem // 11



letter to his even more famous Irish colleague, Sir William Rowan
Hamilton.
    It is easy to prove that at least four colours are necessary for
some maps, because there are maps with four regions, each
adjacent to all the others. Four counties in the map of England
(shown here slightly simplified) form such an arrangement,
which proves that at least four colours are necessary in this case.
Can you find them on the map?




                                    A simple map
                                    needing four colours.



    De Morgan did make some progress: he proved that it is not
possible to find an analogous map with five regions, each
adjacent to all four of the others. However, this does not prove
the four-colour theorem. All it does is prove that the simplest
way in which it might go wrong doesn’t happen. For all we
know, there might be a very complicated map with, say, a
hundred regions, which can’t be coloured using only four
colours because of the way long chains of regions connect to
their neighbours. There’s no reason to suppose that a ‘bad’ map
has only five regions.
    The first printed reference to the problem dates from 1878,
when Arthur Cayley wrote a letter to the Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society (a society founded by De Morgan) to ask
whether anyone had solved the problem yet. They had not, but
in the following year Arthur Kempe, a barrister, published a
proof, and that seemed to be that.
    Kempe’s proof was clever. First he proved that any map
contains at least one region with five or fewer neighbours. If a
region has three neighbours, you can shrink it away, getting a
simpler map, and if the simpler map can be 4-coloured, so can
12 // The Four-Colour Theorem



the original one. You just give the region that you shrunk
whichever colour differs from those of its three neighbours.
Kempe had a more elaborate method for getting rid of a region
with four or five neighbours. Having established this key fact, the
rest of the proof was straightforward: to 4-colour a map, keep
shrinking it, region by region, until it has four regions or fewer.
Colour those regions with different colours, and then reverse the
procedure, restoring regions one by one and colouring them
according to Kempe’s rules. Easy!




                                                    If the right-
                                                    hand map can
                                                    be 4-coloured,
                                                    so can the left-
                                                    hand one.


    It looked too good to be true – and it was. In 1890 Percy
Heawood discovered that Kempe’s rules didn’t always work. If
you shrunk a region with five neighbours, and then tried to put it
back, you could run into terminal trouble. In 1891 Peter Guthrie
Tait thought he had fixed this error, but Julius Petersen found a
mistake in Tait’s method, too.
    Heawood did observe that Kempe’s method can be adapted
to prove that five colours are always sufficient for any map. But
no one could find a map that needed more than four. The gap was
tantalising, and quickly became a disgrace. When you know that
a mathematical problem has either 4 or 5 as its answer, surely
you ought to be able to decide which!
    But . . . no one could.
    The usual kind of partial progress then took place. In 1922
Philip Franklin proved that all maps with 26 or fewer regions can
be 4-coloured. This wasn’t terribly edifying in itself, but
Franklin’s method paved the way for the eventual solution by
introducing the idea of a reducible configuration. A configuration
is any connected set of regions within the map, plus some
                                    The Four-Colour Theorem // 13



information about how many regions are adjacent to those in
the configuration. Given some configuration, you can remove it
from the map to get a simpler map – one with fewer regions. The
configuration is reducible if there is a way to 4-colour the original
map, provided you can 4-colour the simpler map. In effect, there
has to be a way to ‘fill in’ colours in that configuration, once
everything else has been 4-coloured.
    A single region with only three neighbours forms a reducible
configuration, for instance. Remove it, and 4-colour what’s left –
if you can. Then put that region back, and give it a colour that
has not been used for its three neighbours. Kempe’s failed proof
does establish that a region with four neighbours forms a
reducible configuration. Where he went wrong was to claim the
same thing for a region with five neighbours.
    Franklin discovered that configurations containing several
regions can sometimes work when single regions don’t. Lots of
multi-region configurations turn out to be reducible.
    Kempe’s proof would have worked if every region with five
neighbours were reducible, and the reason why it would have
worked is instructive. Basically, Kempe thought he had proved
two things. First, every map contains a region with either three,
four or five adjacent ones. Second, each of the associated
configurations is reducible. Now these two facts together imply
that every map contains a reducible configuration. In particular,
when you remove a reducible configuration, the resulting
simpler map also contains a reducible configuration. Remove
that one, and the same thing happens. So, step by step, you can
get rid of reducible configurations until the result is so simple
that it has at most four regions. Colour those however you wish –
at most four colours will be needed. Then restore the previously
removed configuration; since this was reducible, the resulting
map can also be 4-coloured . . . and so on. Working backwards,
we eventually 4-colour the original map.
    This argument works because every map contains one of our
irreducible configurations: they form an ‘unavoidable set’.
    Kempe’s attempted proof failed because one of his config-
14 // The Four-Colour Theorem



urations, a region with five neighbours, isn’t reducible. But the
message from Franklin’s investigation is: don’t worry. Try a
bigger list, using lots of more complicated configurations. Dump
the region with five neighbours; replace it by several configura-
tions with two or three regions. Make the list as big as you need.
If you can find some unavoidable set of reducible configurations,
however big and messy, you’re done.
    In fact – and this matters in the final proof – you can get away
with a weaker notion of unavoidability, applying only to
‘minimal criminals’: hypothetical maps that require five colours,
with the nice feature that any smaller map needs only four
colours. This condition makes it easier to prove that a given set is
unavoidable. Ironically, once you prove the theorem, it turns out
that no minimal criminals exist. No matter: that’s the proof
strategy.
    In 1950 Heinrich Heesch, who had invented a clever method
for proving that many configurations are reducible, said that he
believed the four-colour theorem could be proved by finding an
unavoidable set of reducible configurations. The only difficulty
was to find one – and it wouldn’t be easy, because some rule-of-
thumb calculations suggested that such a set would have to
include about 10,000 configurations.
    By 1970 Wolfgang Haken had found some improvements to
Heesch’s method for proving configurations to be reducible, and
began to feel that a computer-assisted proof was within reach. It
should be possible to write a computer program to check that
each configuration in some proposed set is reducible. You could
write down several thousand configurations by hand, if you
really had to. Proving them unavoidable would be time-
consuming, but not necessarily out of reach. But with the
computers then available, it would have taken about a century to
deal with an unavoidable set of 10,000 configurations. Modern
computers can do the job in a few hours, but Haken had to work
with what was available, which meant that he had to improve
the theoretical methods, and cut the calculation down to a
feasible size.
                                    The Four-Colour Theorem // 15



     Working with Kenneth Appel, Haken began a ‘dialogue’ with
his computer. He would think of potential new methods for
attacking the problem; the computer would then do lots of sums
designed to tell him whether these methods were likely to
succeed. By 1975, the size of an unavoidable set was down to
only 2,000, and the two mathematicians had found much faster
tests for irreducibility. Now there was a serious prospect that a
human–machine collaboration could do the trick. In 1976 Appel
and Haken embarked on the final phase: working out a suitable
unavoidable set. They would tell the computer what set they had
in mind, and it would then test each configuration to see
whether it was reducible. If a configuration failed this test, it was
removed and replaced by one or more alternatives, and the
computer would repeat the test for irreducibility. It was a delicate
process, and there was no guarantee that it would stop – but if it
ever did, they would have found an unavoidable set of
irreducible configurations.
     In June 1976 the process stopped. The computer reported
that the current set of configurations – which at that stage
contained 1,936 of them, a figure they later reduced to 1,405 –
was unavoidable, and every single one of those 1,936 config-
urations was irreducible. The proof was complete.
     The computation took about 1,000 hours in those days, and
the test for reducibility involved 487 different rules. Today, with
faster computers, we can repeat the whole thing in about an
hour. Other mathematicians have found smaller unavoidable
sets and improved the tests for reducibility. But no one has yet
managed to cut down the unavoidable set to something so small
that an unaided human can verify that it does the job. And even
if somebody did do that, this type of proof doesn’t provide a very
satisfactory explanation of why the theorem is true. It just says
‘do a lot of sums, and the end result works’. The sums are clever,
and there are some neat ideas involved, but most mathemati-
cians would like to get a bit more insight into what’s really going
on. One possible approach is to invent some notion of
‘curvature’ for maps, and interpret reducibility as a kind of
16 // Shaggy Dog Story



‘flattening out’ process. But no one has yet found a suitable way
to do this.
     Nevertheless, we now know that the four-colour theorem is
true, answering Francis Guthrie’s innocent-looking question.
Which is an amazing achievement, even if it does depend on a
little bit of help from a computer.


...........................................
   Answer on page 254