Shaggy Dog Story
Brave Sir Lunchalot was travelling through foreign parts.
Suddenly there was a flash of lighting and a deafening crack of
thunder, and the rain started bucketing down. Fearing rust, he
headed for the nearest shelter, Duke Ethelfred’s castle. He arrived
to find the Duke’s wife, Lady Gingerbere, weeping piteously.
    Sir Lunchalot liked attractive young ladies, and for a brief
moment he noticed a distinct glint through Gingerbere’s tears.
Ethelfred was very old and frail, he observed . . . Only one thing,
he vowed, would deter him from a secret tryst with the Lady –
the one thing in all the world that he could not stand.
    Puns.
    Having greeted the Duke, Lunchalot enquired why
Gingerbere was so sad.
    ‘It is my uncle, Lord Elpus,’ she explained. ‘He died yester-
day.’
    ‘Permit me to offer my sincerest condolences,’ said
Lunchalot.
    ‘That is not why I weep so . . . so piteously, sir knight,’ replied
Gingerbere. ‘My cousins Gord, Evan and Liddell are unable to
fulfil the terms of uncle’s will.’
    ‘Why ever not?’
    ‘It seems that Lord Elpus invested the entire family fortune in
a rare breed of giant riding-dogs. He owned 17 of them.’
    Lunchalot had never heard of a riding-dog, but he did not
                                            Shaggy Dog Story // 17



wish to display his ignorance in front of such a lithesome lady.
But this fear, it appeared, could be set to rest, for she said,
‘Although I have heard much of these animals, I myself have
never set eyes on one.’
    ‘They are no fit sight for a fair lady,’ said Ethelfred firmly.
    ‘And the terms of the will—?’ Lunchalot asked, to divert the
direction of the conversation.
    ‘Ah. Lord Elpus left everything to his three sons. He decreed
that Gord should receive half the dogs, Evan should receive one-
third, and Liddell one-ninth.’
    ‘Mmm. Could be messy.’
    ‘No dog is to be subdivided, good knight.’
    Lunchalot stiffened at the phrase ‘good knight’, but decided
it had been uttered innocently and was not a pathetic attempt at
humour.
    ‘Well—’ Lunchalot began.
    ‘Pah, ’tis a puzzle as ancient as yonder hills!’ said Ethelfred
scathingly. ‘All you have to do is take one of our own riding-dogs
over to the castle. Then there are 18 of the damn’ things!’
    ‘Yes, my husband, I understand the numerology, but—’
    ‘So the first son gets half that, which is 9; the second gets one-
third, which is 6; the third son gets one-ninth, which is 2. That
makes 17 altogether, and our own dog can be ridden back here!’
    ‘Yes, my husband, but we have no one here who is manly
enough to ride such a dog.’
    Sir Lunchalot seized his opportunity. ‘Sire, I will ride your
dog!’ The look of admiration in Gingerbere’s eye showed him
how shrewd his gallant gesture had been.
    ‘Very well,’ said Ethelfred. ‘I will summon my houndsman
and he will bring the animal to the courtyard. Where we shall
meet them.’
    They waited in an archway as the rain continued to fall.
When the dog was led into the courtyard, Lunchalot’s jaw
dropped so far that it was a good job he had his helmet on. The
animal was twice the size of an elephant, with thick striped fur,
claws like broadswords, blazing red eyes the size of Lunchalot’s
18 // Shaggy Cat Story



shield, huge floppy ears dangling to the ground, and a tail like a
pig’s – only with more twists and covered in sharp spines. Rain
cascaded off its coat in waterfalls. The smell was indescribable.
    Perched improbably on its back was a saddle.
    Gingerbere seemed even more shocked than he by the sight
of this terrible monstrosity. However, Sir Lunchalot was
undaunted. Nothing could daunt his confidence. Nothing could
prevent a secret tryst with the Lady, once he returned astride the
giant hound, the will executed in full. Except . . .
    Well, as it happened, Sir Lunchalot did not ride the
monstrous dog to Lord Elpus’s castle, and for all he knows the
will has still not been executed. Instead, he leaped on his horse
and rode off angrily into the stormy darkness, mortally offended,
leaving Gingerbere to suffer the pangs of unrequited lust.
    It wasn’t Ethelfred’s dodgy arithmetic – it was what the Lady
had said to her husband in a stage whisper.
    What did she say?


...........................................
   Answer on page 254