Rabbits in the Hat
The Great Whodunni, a stage magician, placed his top hat on the
table.
    ‘In this hat are two rabbits,’ he announced. ‘Each of them is
either black or white, with equal probability. I am now going to
convince you, with the aid of my lovely assistant Grumpelina,
that I can deduce their colours without looking inside the hat!’
                                             Rabbits in the Hat // 19



   He turned to his assistant, and extracted a black rabbit from
her costume. ‘Please place this rabbit in the hat.’ She did.




       Pop him in the hat and deduce what’s already there.

     Whodunni now turned to the audience. ‘Before Grumpelina
added the third rabbit, there were four equally likely combina-
tions of rabbits.’ He wrote a list on a small blackboard: BB, BW,
WB and WW. ‘Each combination is equally likely – the
probability is 14.
     ‘But then I added a black rabbit. So the possibilities are BBB,
BWB, BBW and BWW – again, each with probability 14.
     ‘Suppose – I won’t do it, this is hypothetical – suppose I were
to pull a rabbit from the hat. What is the probability that it is
black? If the rabbits are BBB, that probability is 1. If BWB or BBW,
it is 23. If BWW, it is 13. So the overall probability of pulling out a
black rabbit is
       1     1 2 1 2 1 1
         61 þ 6 þ 6 þ 6
       4     4 3 4 3 4 3
which is exactly 23.
    ‘But – if there are three rabbits in a hat, of which exactly r are
black and the rest white, the probability of extracting a black
rabbit is r=3. Therefore r ¼ 2, so there are two black rabbits in the
hat.’ He reached into the hat and pulled out a black rabbit. ‘Since
I added this black rabbit, the original pair must have been one
black and one white!’
    The Great Whodunni bowed, to tumultuous applause. Then
20 // River Crossing 1 – Farm Produce



he pulled two rabbits from the hat – one pale lilac and the other
shocking pink.
    It seems evident that you can’t deduce the contents of a hat
without finding out what’s inside. Adding the extra rabbit and
then removing it again (was it the same black rabbit? Do we
care?) is a clever piece of misdirection. But why is the calculation
wrong?


...........................................
   Answer on page 255