Make Me a Pentagon
You have a long, thin rectangular strip of paper. Your task is to
make from it a regular pentagon (a five-sided figure with all edges
the same length and all angles the same size).


                                                         Unorthodox
                                                         geometry.




...........................................
   Answer on page 258



What is p?
The number p, which is approximately 3.141 59, is the length of
the circumference of a circle whose diameter is exactly 1. More
generally, a circle of diameter d has a circumference of pd. A
simple approximation to p is 317 or 22/7, but this is not exact. 317 is
approximately 3.14 285, which is wrong by the third decimal
place. A better approximation is 355/113, which is 3.141 592 9 to
seven places, whereas p is 3.141 592 6 to seven places.
    How do we know that p is not an exact fraction? However
much you continue to improve the approximation x=y by using
ever larger numbers, you can never get to p itself, only better and
better approximations. A number that cannot be written exactly
as a fraction is said to be irrational. The simplest proof that p is
irrational uses calculus, and it was found by Johann Lambert in
1770. Although we can’t write down an exact numerical
representation of p, we can write down various formulas that
define it precisely, and Lambert’s proof uses one of those
formulas.
    More strongly, p is transcendental – it does not satisfy any
algebraic equation that relates it to rational numbers. This was
proved by Ferdinand Lindemann in 1882, also using calculus.
24 // Legislating the Value of p



The fact that p is transcendental implies that the classical
geometric problem of ‘squaring the circle’ is impossible. This
problem asks for a Euclidean construction of a square whose area
is equal to that of a given circle (which turns out to be equivalent
to constructing a line whose length is the circumference of the
circle). A construction is called Euclidean if it can be performed
using an unmarked ruler and a compass. Well, to be pedantic, a
‘pair of compasses’, which means a single instrument, much as a


...........................................
‘pair of scissors’ comes as one gadget.



Legislating the Value of p
There is a persistent myth that the State Legislature of Indiana
(some say Iowa, others Idaho) once passed a law declaring the
correct value of p to be – well, sometimes people say 3,
sometimes 3 16 . . .
    Anyway, the myth is false.
    However, something uncomfortably close nearly happened.
The actual value concerned is unclear: the document in question
seems to imply at least nine different values, all of them wrong.
The law was not passed: it was ‘indefinitely postponed’, and
apparently still is. The law concerned was House Bill 246 of the
Indiana State Legislature for 1897, and it empowered the State of
Indiana to make sole use of a ‘new mathematical truth’ at no
cost. This Bill was passed – there was no reason to do otherwise,
since it did not oblige the State to do anything. In fact, the vote
was unanimous.
    The new truth, however, was a rather complicated, and
incorrect, attempt to ‘square the circle’ – that is, to construct p
geometrically. An Indianapolis newspaper published an article
pointing out that squaring the circle is impossible. By the time
the Bill went to the Senate for confirmation, the politicians –
even though most of them knew nothing about p – had sensed
that there were difficulties. (The efforts of Professor C.A. Waldo
of the Indiana Academy of Science, a mathematician who
                                     If They Had Passed It . . . // 25



happened to be visiting the House when the Bill was debated,
probably helped concentrate their minds.) They did not debate
the validity of the mathematics; they decided that the matter
was not suitable for legislation. So they postponed the bill . . .
and as I write, 111 years later, it remains that way.
    The mathematics involved was almost certainly the brain-
child of Edwin J. Goodwin, a doctor who dabbled in mathe-
matics. He lived in the village of Solitude in Posey County,
Indiana, and at various times claimed to have trisected the angle
and duplicated the cube – two other famous and equally
impossible feats – as well as squaring the circle. At any rate, the
legislature of Indiana did not consciously attempt to give p an
incorrect value by law – although there is a persuasive argument
that passing the Bill would have ‘enacted’ Goodwin’s approach,
implying its accuracy in law, though perhaps not in mathe-


...........................................
matics. It’s a delicate legal point.



If They Had Passed It . . .
If the Indiana State Legislature had passed Bill 246, and if the
worst-case scenario had proved legally valid, namely that the
value of p in law was different from its mathematical value, the
consequences would have been distinctly interesting. Suppose
that the legal value is p 6¼ p, but the legislation states that p ¼ p.
Then
       pp
           ¼ 1 mathematically
       pp

but
       pp
           ¼ 0 legally
       pp

Since mathematical truths are legally valid, the law would then
be maintaining that 1 ¼ 0. Therefore all murderers have a cast-
iron defence: admit to one murder, then argue that legally it is
zero murders. And that’s not the last of it. Multiply by one
26 // Empty Glasses



billion, to deduce that one billion equals zero. Now any citizen
apprehended in possession of no drugs is in possession of drugs
to a street value of $1 billion.
    In fact, any statement whatsoever would become legally
provable.
    It seems likely that the Law would not be quite logical enough
for this kind of argument to stand up in court. But sillier legal
arguments, often based on abuse of statistics, have done just
that, causing innocent people to be locked away for long periods.


...........................................
So Indiana’s legislators might have opened up Pandora’s box.