Why Does Minus Times Minus Make Plus?
When we first meet negative numbers, we are told that multi-
plying two negative numbers together makes a positive number,
so that, for example, ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ þ6. This often seems rather
puzzling.
    The first point to appreciate is that starting from the usual
conventions for arithmetic with positive numbers, we are free to
define ð2Þ6ð3Þ to be anything we want. It could be 99, or
127p, if we wished. So the main question is not what is the true
value, but what is the sensible value. Several different lines of
thought all converge on the same result – namely, that
ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ þ6. I include the þ sign for emphasis.
    But why is this sensible? I rather like the interpretation of a
negative number as a debt. If my bank account contains £–3,
then I owe the bank £3. Suppose that my debt is multiplied by 2
(positive): then it surely becomes a debt of £6. So it makes sense
to insist that ðþ2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ 6, and most of us are happy with
that. What, though, should ð2Þ6ð3Þ be? Well, if the bank
kindly writes off (takes away) two debts of £3 each, I am £6 better
off – my account has changed exactly as it would if I had
deposited £þ6. So in banking terms, we want ð2Þ6ð3Þ to equal
þ6.
    The second argument is that we can’t have both ðþ2Þ6ð3Þ
and ð2Þ6ð3Þ equal to þ6. If that were the case, then we could
cancel the 3 and deduce that þ2 ¼ 2, which is silly.
    The third argument begins by pointing out an unstated
assumption in the second one: that the usual laws of arithmetic
should remain valid for negative numbers. It proceeds by adding
38 // Heron Suit



that this is a reasonable thing to aim for, if only for mathematical
elegance. If we require the usual laws to be valid, then
        ðþ2Þ6ð3Þ þ ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ ð2  2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ 06ð3Þ ¼ 0

so
        6 þ ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ 0

Adding 6 to both sides, we find that
        ð2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ þ6

In fact a similar argument justifies taking ðþ2Þ6ð3Þ ¼ 6, as
well.
    Putting all this together: mathematical elegance leads us to
define minus times minus to be plus. In applications such as
finance, this choice turns out to match reality in a straightfor-
ward manner. So as well as keeping arithmetic simple, we end up
with a good model for important aspects of the real world.
    We could do it differently. But we’d end up by complicating
arithmetic, and reducing its applicability. Basically, there’s no
contest. Even so, ‘minus times minus makes plus’ is a conscious


...........................................
human convention, not an inescapable fact of nature.