How to Remember a Round Number
A traditional French rhyme goes like this:*
        Que j’aime a faire apprendre
        Un nombre utile aux sages!
        Glorieux Archimède, artiste ingenieux,
        Toi, de qui Syracuse loue encore le mérite!
But to which ‘number useful to the sages’ does it refer? Counting
the letters in each word, treating ‘j’ as a word with one letter and
placing a decimal point after the first digit, we get
        3:141 592 653 589 793 238 462 6


*   A loose translation is:
        How I like to make
        The sages learn a useful number!
        Glorious Archimedes, ingenious artist,
        You whose merit Syracuse still praises.
40 // How to Remember a Round Number



which is p to the first 22 decimal places. Many similar
mnemonics for p exist in many languages. In English, one of the
best known is
       How I want a drink, alcoholic of course, after the heavy
       chapters involving quantum mechanics. One is, yes,
       adequate even enough to induce some fun and pleasure
       for an instant, miserably brief.
It probably stopped there because the next digit is a 0, and it’s
not entirely clear how best to represent a word with no letters.
(For one convention, see later.) Another is:
       Sir, I bear a rhyme excelling
       In mystic force, and magic spelling
       Celestial sprites elucidate
       All my own striving can’t relate.
An ambitious p-mnemonic featured in The Mathematical
Intelligencer in 1986 (volume 8, page 56). This is an informal
‘house journal’ for professional mathematicians. The mnemonic
is a self-referential story encoding the first 402 decimals of p. It
uses punctuation marks (ignoring full stops) to represents the
digit zero, and words with more than 9 letters represent two
consecutive digits – for instance, a word with 13 letters
represents the digits 13 in that order. Oh, and any actual digit
represents itself. The story begins like this:
       For a time I stood pondering on circle sizes. The large
       computer mainframe quietly processed all of its assembly
       code. Inside my entire hope lay for figuring out an elusive
       expansion. Value: pi. Decimals expected soon. I nervously
       entered a format procedure. The mainframe processed the
       request. Error. I, again entering it, carefully retyped. This
       iteration gave zero error printouts in all – success.
For the rest of the story, and many other p-mnemonics in various
languages, see


...........................................
www.geocities.com/capecanaveral/lab/3550/pimnem.htm
                                  The Bridges of Königsberg // 41



The Bridges of Königsberg
Occasionally, a simple puzzle starts a whole new area of
mathematics. Such occurrences are rare, but I can think of at
least three. The most famous such puzzle is known as the Bridges
of Königsberg, which led Leonhard Euler* to invent a branch of
graph theory in 1735. Königsberg, which was in Prussia in those
days, straddled the river Pregel. There were two islands,
connected to the banks and each other by seven bridges. The
puzzle was: is it possible to find a path that crosses each bridge
exactly once?




                                                        Euler’s
                                                        diagram
                                                        of the
                                                        Königsberg
                                                        bridges.


    Euler solved the puzzle by proving that no solution exists.
More generally, he gave a criterion for any problem of this kind
to have a solution, and observed that it did not apply to this
particular example. He pointed out that the exact geometry is
irrelevant – what matters is how everything is connected. So the
puzzle reduces to a simple network of dots, joined by lines, here
shown superimposed on the map. Each dot corresponds to one
connected piece of land, and two dots are joined by lines if there
is a bridge linking the corresponding pieces of land.




*   It is mandatory to point out that his name is pronounced ‘oiler’,
    not ‘yooler’. Numerous oil-based puns then become equally
    mandatory, but I won’t mention any.
42 // The Bridges of Königsberg




                                                       Turning the
                                                       Königsberg
                                                       bridges into
                                                       a network.



     So we get four dots, A, B, C and D, and seven edges, a, b, c, d,
e, f and g, one for each bridge. The puzzle now simplifies to this:
is it possible to find a path through the network that includes
each line exactly once? You might like to experiment before
reading on.
     To work out when a solution exists, Euler distinguished two
kinds of path. An open tour starts and ends at different dots; a
closed tour starts and ends at the same dot. He proved that for this
particular network, neither kind of tour exists. The main
theoretical idea is the valency of each dot: how many lines meet
there. For instance, 5 lines meet at dot A, so the valency of A is 5.
     Suppose that a closed tour exists on some network. Whenever
one of the lines in the tour enters a dot, then the next line must
exit from that dot. So, if a closed tour is possible, the number of
lines at any given dot must be even: every dot must have even
valency. This already rules out any closed tour of the Königsberg
bridges, because that network has three dots of valency 3 and
one of valency 5 – all odd numbers.
     A similar criterion works for open tours, but now there must
be exactly two dots of odd valency: one at the start of the tour,
the other at its end. The Königsberg diagram has four vertices
with odd valency, so there is no open tour either.
     Euler also proved that these conditions are sufficient for a
tour to exist, provided the diagram is connected – any two dots
must be linked by some path. Euler’s proof of this is quite
                             How to do Lots of Mathematics // 43



lengthy. Nowadays a proof takes just a few lines, thanks to new


...........................................
discoveries inspired by his pioneering efforts.