Who Was Pythagoras?
We recognise the name ‘Pythagoras’ because it is attached to a
theorem, one that most of us have grappled with at school. ‘The
square on the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle is equal to
the sum of the squares on the other two sides.’ That is, if you take
any right-angled triangle, then the square of the longest side is
equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides. Well
known as his theorem may be, the actual person has proved
rather elusive, although we know more about him as a historical
figure than we do for, say, Euclid. What we don’t know is whether
he proved his eponymous theorem, and there are good reasons
to suppose that, even if he did, he wasn’t the first to do so.
    But more of that story later.
    Pythagoras was Greek, born around 569 BC on the island of
Samos in the north-eastern Aegean. (The exact date is disputed,
but this one is wrong by at most 20 years.) His father,
                                        Proofs of Pythagoras // 47



Mnesarchus, was a merchant from Tyre; his mother, Pythais, was
from Samos. They may have met when Mnesarchus brought corn
to Samos during a famine, and was publicly thanked by being
made a citizen.
    Pythagoras studied philosophy under Pherekydes. He prob-
ably visited another philosopher, Thales of Miletus. He attended
lectures given by Anaximander, a pupil of Thales, and absorbed
many of his ideas on cosmology and geometry. He visited Egypt,
was captured by Cambyses II, the King of Persia, and taken to
Babylon as a prisoner. There he learned Babylonian mathematics
and musical theory. Later he founded the school of Pythagoreans
in the Italian city of Croton (now Crotone), and it is for this that
he is best remembered. The Pythagoreans were a mystical cult.
They believed that the universe is mathematical, and that
various symbols and numbers have a deep spiritual meaning.
    Various ancient writers attributed various mathematical
theorems to the Pythagoreans, and by extension to Pythagoras –
notably his famous theorem about right-angled triangles. But we
have no idea what mathematics Pythagoras himself originated.
We don’t know whether the Pythagoreans could prove the
theorem, or just believed it to be true. And there is evidence from
the inscribed clay tablet known as Plimpton 322 that the ancient
Babylonians may have understood the theorem 1200 years
earlier – though they probably didn’t possess a proof, because


...........................................
Babylonians didn’t go much for proofs anyway.