Proofs of Pythagoras
Euclid’s method for proving Pythagoras’s Theorem is fairly
complicated, involving a diagram known to Victorian school-
boys as ‘Pythagoras’s pants’ because it looked like underwear
hung on a washing line. This particular proof fitted into Euclid’s
development of geometry, which is why he chose it. But there
are many other proofs, some of which make the theorem much
more obvious.
48 // Proofs of Pythagoras




                                       Pythagoras’s
                                       pants.



    One of the simplest proofs is a kind of mathematician’s
jigsaw puzzle. Take any right-angled triangle, make four copies,
and assemble them inside a carefully chosen square. In one
arrangement we see the square on the hypotenuse; in the other,
we see the squares on the other two sides. Clearly, the areas
concerned are equal, since they are the difference between the
area of the surrounding square and the areas of the four copies of
the triangle.




       (Left) The square on the hypotenuse (plus four triangles). (Right)
       The sum of the squares on the other two sides (plus four
       triangles). Take away the triangles . . . and Pythagoras’s
       Theorem is proved.

    Then there’s a cunning tiling pattern. Here the slanting grid
is formed by copies of the square on the hypotenuse, and the
other grid involves both of the smaller squares. If you look at
how one slanting square overlaps the other two, you can see how
to cut the big square into pieces that can be reassembled to make
the two smaller squares.
                                          A Constant Bore // 49




                                     Proof by
                                     tiling.

    Another proof is a kind of geometric ‘movie’, showing how to
split the square on the hypotenuse into two parallelograms,
which then slide apart – without changing area – to make the
two smaller squares.




                                                   Proof by
                                                   movie.


...........................................