A Constant Bore
‘Now, this component is a solid copper sphere with a cylindrical
hole bored exactly through its centre,’ said Rusty Nail, the
construction manager. He opened a blueprint on his laptop’s
screen:
50 // Fermat’s Last Theorem




                                             Cross-section of sphere
                                             with cylindrical hole.

    ‘Looks straightforward,’ said the foreman, Lewis Bolt. ‘That’s
quite a lot of copper.’
    ‘Coincidentally, that’s what I want you to work out,’ said
Rusty. ‘What volume of copper do we need to cast it?’
    Lewis stared at the blueprint. ‘It doesn’t say how big the
sphere is.’ He paused. ‘I can’t find the answer unless you tell me
the radius of the sphere.’
    ‘Hmmm,’ said Rusty. ‘They must have forgotten to put that
in. But I’m sure you can work something out. I need the answer
by lunchtime.’
    What is the volume of copper required? Does it depend on the size
of the sphere?


...........................................
   Answer on page 264



Fermat’s Last Theorem
The great virtue of Fermat’s Last Theorem is that it’s easy to
understand what it means. What made the theorem famous is
that proving it turned out to be amazingly hard. So hard, in fact,
that it took about 350 years of effort, by many of the world’s
leading mathematicians, to polish it off. And to do that, they had
to invent entire new mathematical theories, and prove things
that looked much harder.
                                      Fermat’s Last Theorem // 51




                                         Pierre de Fermat.

    It all started around 1650, when Pierre de Fermat wrote an
enigmatic note in the margin of his copy of Diophantus’s book
Arithmetica: ‘of which fact I have found a remarkable proof, ‘but
this margin is too small to contain it.’ Proof of what? Let me back
up a bit.
    Diophantus was probably Greek, and he lived in ancient
Alexandria. Some time around AD 250 he wrote a book about
solving algebraic equations – with a slight twist: the solutions
were required to be fractions, or better still, whole numbers. Such
equations are called Diophantine equations to this day. A typical
Diophantine problem is: find two squares whose sum is square
(using only whole numbers). One possible answer is 9 and 16,
which add up to 25. Here 9 is the square of 3, while 16 is the
square of 4, and 25 is the square of 5. Another answer is 25 (the
square of 5) and 144 (the square of 12), which add up to 169 (the
square of 13). These are the tip of an iceberg.
    This particular problem is linked to Pythagoras’s Theorem,
and Diophantus was following a long tradition of looking for
Pythagorean triples – whole numbers that can form the sides of a
right-angled triangle. Diophantus wrote down a general rule for
finding all Pythagorean triples. He wasn’t the first to discover it,
but it belonged very naturally in his book. Now Fermat wasn’t a
professional mathematician – he never held an academic
position. In his day job he was a legal advisor. But his passion was
mathematics, especially what we now call number theory, the
properties of ordinary whole numbers. This area uses the
52 // Fermat’s Last Theorem



simplest ingredients anywhere in mathematics, but paradoxic-
ally it is one of the most difficult areas to make progress in. The
simpler the ingredients, the harder it is to make things with
them.
    Fermat pretty much created number theory. He took over
where Diophantus had left off, and by the time he had finished,
the subject was virtually unrecognisable. And some time around
1650 – we don’t even know the exact date – he must have been
thinking about Pythagorean triples, and wondered ‘can we do it
with cubes?’
    Just as the square of a number is what you get by multiplying
two copies of the same number, the cube is what you get by
multiplying three copies. That is, the square of 5, say, is
565 ¼ 25, and the cube of 5 is 56565 ¼ 125. These are written
more compactly as 52 and 53, respectively. No doubt Fermat tried
a few possibilities. Is the sum of the cubes of 1 and 2 a cube, for
instance? The cubes here are 1 and 8, so their sum is 9. That’s a
square, but not a cube: no banana.
    He surely noticed that you can get pretty close. The cube of 9
is 729; the cube of 10 is 1,000; their sum is 1,729. That’s very
nearly the cube of 12, which is 1,728. Missed by one! Still no
banana.
    Like any mathematician, Fermat would have tried bigger
numbers, and used any short cuts he could think of. Nothing
worked. Eventually he gave up: he hadn’t found any solutions,
and by now he suspected that there weren’t any. Except for the
cube of 0 (which is also 0) and any cube whatsoever, which add
up to the whatsoever – but we all know that adding zero makes
no difference to anything, so that’s ‘trivial’, and he wasn’t
interested in trivialities.
    OK, so cubes don’t get us anywhere. What about the next
such type of number, fourth powers? You get those by multi-
plying four copies of the same number, for example
3636363 ¼ 81 is the fourth power of 3, written as 34 . Still no
joy. In fact, for fourth powers Fermat found a logical proof that
no solutions exist except trivial ones. Very few of Fermat’s proofs
                                      Fermat’s Last Theorem // 53



have survived, and few of them were written down, but we know
how this one went, and it’s both cunning and correct. It takes
some hints from Diophantus’s method of finding Pythagorean
triples.
    Fifth powers? Sixth powers? Still nothing. By now Fermat was
ready to make a bold statement: ‘To resolve a cube into the sum
of two cubes, a fourth power into two fourth powers, or in
general any power higher than the second into two powers of the
same kind, is impossible.’ That is: the only way for two nth
powers to add up to an nth power is when n is 2 and we are
looking at Pythagorean triples. This is what he wrote in his
margin, and it’s what caused so much fuss for the next 350 years.
    We don’t actually have Fermat’s copy of the Arithmetica with
its marginal notes. What we have is a printed edition of the book
prepared later by his son, which has the notes printed in it.
    Fermat included various other unproved but fascinating bits
of number theory in his letters and the marginal notes published
by his son, and the world’s mathematicians rose to the
challenge. Soon all but one of Fermat’s statements had been
proved – apart from one that was disproved, but in that case
Fermat never claimed he had a proof anyway. The sole remaining
‘last theorem’ – not the last one he wrote down, but the last one
that no one else could prove or disprove – was the marginal note
about sums of like powers.
    Fermat’s Last Theorem became notorious. Euler proved that
there is no solution in cubes. Fermat himself had done fourth
powers. Peter Lejeune Dirichlet dealt with fifth powers in 1828,
and 14th powers in 1832. Gabriel Lamé published a proof for 7th
powers, but it had a mistake in it. Carl Friedrich Gauss, one of the
best mathematicians who has ever lived and an expert in number
theory, tried to patch up Lamé’s attempt, but failed, and gave up
on the whole problem. He wrote to a scientific friend that the
problem ‘has little interest for me, since a multitude of such
propositions, which one can neither prove nor refute, can easily
be formulated’. But for once Gauss’s instincts let him down: the
54 // Fermat’s Last Theorem



problem is interesting, and his remark seems to have been a case
of sour grapes.
    In 1874 Lamé had a new idea, linking Fermat’s Last Theorem
to a special type of complex number – involving the square root
of minus one (see page 184). There was nothing wrong with
complex numbers, but there was a hidden assumption in Lamé’s
argument, and Ernst Kummer wrote to him to inform him that it
went wrong for 23rd powers. Kummer managed to fix Lamé’s
idea, eventually proving Fermat’s Last Theorem for all powers up
to the 100th, except for 37, 59 and 67. Later mathematicians
polished off these powers too, and extended the list, until by
1980 Fermat’s Last Theorem had been proved for all powers up to
the 125,000th.
    You might think that this would be good enough, but
mathematicians are made of sterner stuff. It has to be all powers,
or nothing. The first 125,000 whole numbers are minuscule
compared with the infinity of numbers that remain. But
Kummer’s methods needed special arguments for each power,
and they weren’t really up to the job. What was needed was a new
idea. Unfortunately, nobody knew where to look for one.
    So number theorists abandoned Fermat’s Last Theorem and
headed off into areas where they could still make progress. One
such area, the theory of elliptic curves, started to get really
exciting, but also very technical. An elliptic curve is not an
ellipse – if it were, we wouldn’t need a different name for it. It is a
curve in the plane whose y-coordinate, squared, is a cubic
formula in its x-coordinate. These curves in turn are connected
with some remarkable expressions involving complex numbers,
called elliptic functions, which were in vogue in the late
nineteenth century. The theory of elliptic curves, and their
associated elliptic functions, became very deep and powerful.
                                      Fermat’s Last Theorem // 55




                                        The elliptic curve
                                        y 2 ¼ x 3  6x þ 6.




     Starting around 1970, a series of mathematicians started to
get glimpses of a strange connection between elliptic curves and
Fermat’s Last Theorem. Roughly speaking, if Fermat was wrong,
and two nth powers do add up to another nth power, then those
three numbers determine an elliptic curve. And because the
powers add like that, it is a very strange elliptic curve, with a
surprising combination of properties. So surprising, in fact, that
it looks wildly unlikely that it can exist at all, as Gerhard Frey
pointed out in 1985.
     This observation opens the way to a ‘proof by contradiction’,
what Euclid called ‘reductio ad absurdum’ (reduction to the
absurd). To prove that some statement is true, you begin by
assuming that, on the contrary, it is false. Then you deduce the
logical consequences of this falsity. If the consequences contra-
dict each other or known facts, then your assumption must have
been wrong – so the statement must be true after all. In 1986
Kenneth Ribet pinned this idea down by proving that if Fermat’s
Last Theorem is false, then the associated elliptic curve violates a
conjecture (that is, a plausible but unproved theorem) intro-
duced by the Japanese mathematicians Yutaka Taniyama and
Goro Shimura. This Taniyama–Shimura conjecture, which dates
56 // Fermat’s Last Theorem



from 1955, says that every elliptic curve is associated with a
special class of elliptic functions, called modular functions.
    Ribet’s discovery implies that any proof of the Taniyama–
Shimura conjecture automatically proves – by contradiction –
Fermat’s Last Theorem as well. Because the assumed falsity of
Fermat’s Last Theorem tells us that Frey’s elliptic curve exists, but
the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture tells us that it doesn’t.
    Unfortunately, the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture was just
that – a conjecture.
    Enter Andrew Wiles. When Wiles was a child he heard about
Fermat’s Last Theorem, and decided that when he grew up he
would become a mathematician and prove it. He did become a
mathematician, but by then he had decided that Fermat’s Last
Theorem was much as Gauss had complained – an isolated
question of no particular interest for the mainstream of
mathematics. But Frey’s discovery changed all that. It meant that
Wiles could work on the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture, an
important mainstream problem, and polish off Fermat’s Last
Theorem too.
    Now, the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture is very difficult –
that’s why it remained a conjecture for some forty years. But it
has good links to many areas of mathematics, and sits firmly in
the middle of an area where the techniques are very powerful:
elliptic curves. For seven years Wiles worked away in his study,
trying every technique he could think of, striving to prove the
Taniyama–Shimura conjecture. Hardly anybody knew that he
was working on that problem; he wanted to keep it secret.
    In June 1993 Wiles gave a series of three lectures at the Isaac
Newton Institute in Cambridge, one of the world’s top
mathematical research centres. Their title was ‘Modular forms,
elliptic curves and Galois representations’, but the experts knew
it must really be about the Taniyama–Shimura conjecture – and,
just possibly, Fermat’s Last Theorem. On day three, Wiles
announced that he had proved the Taniyama–Shimura con-
jecture, not for all elliptic curves, but for a special kind called
‘semistable’.
                                         Fermat’s Last Theorem // 57



    Frey’s elliptic curve, if it exists, is semistable. Wiles was telling
his audience that he had proved Fermat’s Last Theorem.
    But it wasn’t quite that straightforward. In mathematics you
don’t get credit for solving a big problem by giving a few lectures
in which you say you’ve got the answer. You have to publish
your ideas in full, so that everyone else can check that they are
right. And when Wiles started that process – which involves
getting experts to go over the work in detail before it gets into
print – some logical gaps emerged. He quickly filled most of
them, but one seemed much harder, and it wouldn’t go away. As
rumours spread that the proposed proof had collapsed, Wiles
made one final attempt to shore up his increasingly rickety proof
– and, contrary to most expectations, he succeeded. One final
technical point was supplied by his former student, Richard
Taylor, and by the end of October 1994 the proof was complete.
The rest, as they say, is history.
    By developing Wiles’s new methods, the Taniyama–Shimura
conjecture has now been proved for all elliptic curves, not just
semistable ones. And although the result of Fermat’s Last
Theorem is still just a minor curiosity – nothing important rests
on it being true or false – the methods used to prove it have
become a permanent and important addition to the mathemat-
ical armoury.
    One question remains. Did Fermat really have a valid proof,
as he claimed in his margin? If he did, it certainly wasn’t the one
that Wiles found, because the necessary ideas and methods
simply did not exist in Fermat’s day. As an analogy: today we
could erect the pyramids using huge cranes, but we can be
confident that however the ancient Egyptians built their
pyramids, they didn’t use modern machinery. Not just because
there is no evidence of such machines, but because the necessary
infrastructure could not have existed. If it had done, the whole
culture would have been different. So the consensus among
mathematicians is that what Fermat thought was a proof
probably had a logical gap that he missed. There are some
plausible but incorrect attempts that would have been feasible in
58 // Pythagorean Triples



his day. But we don’t know whether his proof – if one ever
existed – followed those lines. Maybe – just maybe – there is a
much simpler proof lurking out there in some unexplored realm
of mathematical imagination, waiting for somebody to stumble


...........................................
into it.* Stranger things have happened.