Wallpaper Patterns
A wallpaper pattern repeats the same image in two directions:
down the wall and across the wall (or on a slant). The repetition
down the wall comes from the paper being printed in a
continuous roll, using a revolving cylinder to create the pattern.
The repetition across the wall makes it possible to continue the
pattern sideways, across adjacent strips of paper, to cover the
entire wall. A ‘drop’ from one panel to the next causes no
problems, and can actually make it easier to hang the paper.




                                       Wallpaper patterns repeat
                                       in two directions.


    The number of possible designs for wallpaper is effectively
infinite. But different designs can have the same underlying
pattern, it’s just that the basic image that gets repeated is
different. For instance, the flower in the design above could be
replaced by a butterfly, or a bird, or an abstract shape. So
mathematicians distinguish essentially different patterns by their
symmetries. What are the different ways in which we can slide
the basic image, or rotate it, or even flip it over (like reflecting it
in a mirror), so that the end result is the same as the start?
    For my pattern of flowers, the only symmetries are slides
along the two directions in which the basic image repeats, or
several such slides performed in turn. This is the simplest type of
symmetry, but there are more elaborate ones involving rotations
and reflections as well. In 1924 George Pólya and Paul Niggli
proved that there are exactly 17 different symmetry types of
wallpaper pattern – surprisingly few.
                                   How Old Was Diophantus? // 71




                                                       The 17 types
                                                       of wallpaper
                                                       pattern.

    In three dimensions the corresponding problem is to list all
possible symmetry types of atomic lattices of crystals. Here there
are 230 types. Curiously, that answer was discovered before
anyone solved the much easier two-dimensional version for


...........................................
wallpaper.