Six Degrees of Separation
In 1998 Duncan Watts and Steven Strogatz published a research
paper in the science journal Nature about ‘small-world networks’.
These are networks in which certain individuals are unusually
well-connected. The paper triggered a mass of research in which
the ideas were applied to real networks such as the Internet and
the transmission of disease epidemics.
74 // Six Degrees of Separation




                                   A small-world network. The
                                   black individual in the middle is
                                   connected to many others,
                                   unlike the grey individuals.

    The story began in 1967 when the psychologist Stanley
Milgram prepared 160 letters with the name of his stockbroker
on the envelope – but no address. Then he ‘lost’ the letters so
that random members of the populace could find them, and, he
hoped, send them on. Many of the letters duly arrived at the
stockbroker’s office, and when they did, they had done so in at
most six steps. This led Milgram to the idea that we are
connected to every other person on the planet by at most five
intermediaries – six degrees of separation.
    I was explaining the Nature paper and its background to my
friend Jack Cohen, in the maths common room. Our head of
department walked past, stopped, and said, ‘Nonsense! Jack, how
many steps are there between you and a Mongolian yak herder?’
Jack’s instant response was: ‘One!’ He then explained that the
person in the office next to his was an ecologist who had worked
in Mongolia. This kind of thing happens to Jack, because he is
one of those unusually well-connected people who makes small-
world networks hang together. For example, he causes both me
and my head of department to be only two steps away from a
Mongolian yak herder.
    You can explore the small-world phenomenon using the
Oracle of Bacon, at oracleofbacon.org. Kevin Bacon is an actor
who has appeared in a lot of movies. Anyone who has appeared
in the same movie as Kevin has a Bacon number of 1. Anyone who
has appeared in the same movie as anyone with a Bacon number
of 1 has a Bacon number of 2, and so on. If Milgram is right,
virtually every actor (movies being the relevant ‘world’) has a
                                 Six Degrees of Separation // 75



Bacon number of 6 or less. At the Oracle, when you type in an
actor’s name it tells you the Bacon number, and which movies
form the links. For instance,

. Michelle Pfeiffer appeared in Amazon Women on the Moon in
    1987 with:
. David Alan Grier, who appeared in The Woodsman in 2004
    with:
. Kevin Bacon
so Michelle’s Bacon number is 2.
    It’s not easy to find anyone with Bacon number bigger than
2! One of them is

. Hayley Mooy, who appeared in Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge
    of the Sith in 2005 with:
. Samuel L. Jackson, who appeared in Snakes on a Plane in 2006
    with:
. Rachel Blanchard, who appeared in Where the Truth Lies in
    2005 with:
. Kevin Bacon
so Hayley has Bacon number 3.
    Mathematicians have their own version of the Oracle of
Bacon, centred on the late Paul Erdős. Erdős wrote more joint
research papers than any other mathematician, so the game goes
the same way but the links are joint papers. My Erdős number is
3, because

.   I wrote a joint paper with:
.   Marty Golubitsky, who wrote a joint paper with:
.   Bruce Rothschild, who wrote a joint paper with:
.   Paul Erdős

and no shorter chain exists. One of my former students, who has
written a joint paper with me but with no one else, has Erdős
number 4.
   Usually, more people take part in the same movie than co-
author the same mathematics research paper – though I can’t say
76 // Trisectors Beware!



the same about some areas of biology or physics. So you’d expect
bigger Erdős numbers than Bacon numbers, on the whole. All
mathematicians with Erdős number 1 or 2 are listed at


...........................................
www.oakland.edu/enp