Trisectors Beware!
Euclid tells us how to bisect an angle – divide it into two equal
parts – and by repeating this method we can divide any given
angle into 4; 8; 16; . . . ; 2n equal parts. But Euclid doesn’t explain
how to trisect an angle – divide it into three equal parts. (Or
quinquisect, five equal parts, or . . . .)
    Traditionally, Euclidean constructions are carried out using
only two instruments – an idealised ruler, with no markings
along its edge, to draw a straight line, and an idealised (pair of)
compass(es), which can draw a circle. It turns out that these
instruments are inadequate for trisecting angles, but the proof
had to wait until 1837, when Pierre Wantzel used algebraic
methods to show that no ruler-and-compass trisection of the
angle 608 is possible. Undeterred, many amateurs continue to
seek trisections. So it may be worth explaining why they don’t
exist.
    Any point can be constructed approximately, and the
approximation can be as accurate as we wish. To trisect an angle
to an accuracy of, say one-trillionth of a degree is easy – in
principle. The mathematical problem is not about practical
solutions: it is about the existence, or not, of ideal, infinitely
accurate ones. It is also about finite sequences of applications of
ruler and compass: if you allow infinitely many applications,
again any point can be constructed – this time exactly.
    The key feature of Euclidean constructions is their ability to
form square roots. Repeating an operation leads to complicated
combinations of square roots of quantities involving square roots
of . . . well, you get the idea. But that’s all you can do with the
traditional instruments.
                                            Trisectors Beware! // 77



    Turning now to algebra, we find the coordinates of such
points by starting with rational numbers and repeatedly taking
square roots. Any such number satisfies an algebraic equation of
a very specific kind. The highest power of the unknown that
appears in the equation (called the degree) must be the square, or
the fourth power, or the eighth power . . . That is, the degree
must be a power of 2.
    An angle of 608 can be formedpﬃﬃ
                                         from three constructible
points: (0, 0), (1, 0), and ð12 , 23Þ, which lie on the unit circle
(radius 1, with its centre at the origin of the coordinate system).
Trisecting this angle is equivalent to constructing a point (x, y)
where the line at 208 to the horizontal axis crosses this circle.
Using trigonometry and algebra, the coordinate x of this point is
a solution of a cubic equation with rational coefficients. In fact x
satisfies the equation 8x3  6x  1 ¼ 0. But the degree of a cubic is
3, which is not a power of 2. Contradiction – so no trisection is
possible. Yes, you can get as close as you wish, but not spot on.




                                Trisecting 608 is
                                equivalent to constructing x.


    Trisectors often look for the impossible method even though
they’ve heard of Wantzel’s proof. They say things like ‘I know it’s
impossible algebraically, but what about geometrically?’ But
Wantzel’s proof shows that there is no geometric solution. It uses
algebraic methods to do that, but algebra and geometry are
mutually consistent parts of mathematics.
    I always tell would-be trisectors that if they think they’ve
found a trisection, a direct consequence is that 3 is an even
number. Do they really want to go down in history as making
that claim?
    If the conditions of the problem are relaxed, many trisections
78 // Langford’s Cubes



exist. Archimedes knew of one that used a ruler with just two
marks along its edge. The Greeks called this kind of technique a
neusis construction. It involves sliding the rule so that the marks
fall on two given curves – here a line and a circle:




                                             How Archimedes
                                             trisected an angle.


...........................................
Langford’s Cubes
The Scottish mathematician C. Dudley Langford was watching
his young son playing with six coloured blocks – two of each
colour. He noticed that the boy had arranged them so that the
two yellow blocks (say) were separated by one block, the two blue
blocks were separated by two blocks, and the two red blocks were
separated by three blocks. Here I’ve used white for yellow, grey
for blue and black for red to show you what I mean:


                                                     Langford’s
                                                     cubes.


     In between the white blocks we find just one block (which
happens to be grey). Between the grey blocks are two blocks (one
black, one white). And between the black blocks are three blocks
(two white and one grey). Langford thought about this and was
able to prove that this is the only such arrangement, except for
its left–right reversal.
     He wondered if you could do the same with more colours –
such as four. And he found that again there is only one
                                        Duplicating the Cube // 79



arrangement, plus its reversal. Can you find it? The simplest way
to work on the puzzle is to use playing cards instead of blocks.
Take two aces, two 2’s, two 3’s and two 4’s. Can you lay the cards
in a row to get exactly one card between the two aces, two cards
between the two 2’s, three cards between the two 3’s and four
cards between the two 4’s?
     There are no such arrangements with five or six pairs of cards,
but there are 26 of them with seven pairs. In general, solutions
exist if and only if the number of pairs is a multiple of 4 or one
less than a multiple of 4. No formula is known for how many
solutions there are, but in 2005 Michaël Krajecki, Christophe
Jaillet and Alain Bui ran a computer for three months and found
that there are precisely 46,845,158,056,515,936 arrangements
with 24 pairs.


...........................................
    Answer on page 271