The Square Wheel
We seldom see a square wheel, but that’s not because such a
wheel can’t roll without creating a bumpy ride. Circular wheels
are great on flat roads. For square wheels, you just need a
different shape of road:


                                                    A square-
                                                    wheeled
                                                    bicycle stays
                                                    level on this
                                                    bumpy road.
                                 Why Can’t I Divide by Zero? // 85



    In fact, the correct shape is a cycloid, which is the path traced
by a point on the rim of a circular wheel as it rolls along a flat
surface. The length of each arch of the cycloid has to be the same
as the perimeter of the wheel. It turns out that almost any shape
of wheel will work provided you build the right kind of road for it
to run on. Reinventing the wheel is easy. What counts is


...........................................
reinventing the road.



Why Can’t I Divide by Zero?
In general, any number can be divided by any other number –
except when the number we are dividing by is 0. ‘Division by
zero’ is forbidden; even our calculators put up error messages if
we try it. Why is zero a pariah in the division stakes?
    The difficulty is not that we can’t define division by zero. We
could for instance, insist that any number divided by zero gives
42. What we can’t do is make that kind of definition and still
have all the usual arithmetical rules working properly. With this
admittedly very silly definition, we could start from 1=0 ¼ 42 and
apply standard arithmetical rules to deduce that 1 ¼ 4260 ¼ 0.
    Before we worry about division by zero, we have to agree on
the rules that we want division to obey. Division is normally
introduced as a kind of opposite to multiplication. What is 6
divided by 2? It is whichever number, multiplied by 2, gives 6.
Namely, 3. So the two statements
       6=2 ¼ 3   and 6 ¼ 263

are logically equivalent. And 3 is the only number that works
here, so 6/2 is unambiguous.
    Unfortunately, this approach runs into major problems when
we try to define division by zero. What is 6 divided by 0? It is
whichever number, multiplied by 0, gives 6. Namely . . . uh. Any
number multiplied by 0 makes 0; you can’t get 6.
    So 6/0 is out, then. So is any other number divided by 0,
except – perhaps – 0 itself. What about 0/0?
86 // River Crossing 2 – Marital Mistrust



    Usually, if you divide a number by itself, you get 1. So we
could define 0=0 to be 1. Now 0 ¼ 160, so the relation with
multiplication works. Nevertheless, mathematicians insist that
0/0 doesn’t make sense. What worries them is a different
arithmetical rule. Suppose that 0=0 ¼ 1. Then
       2 ¼ 261 ¼ 26ð0=0Þ ¼ ð260Þ=0 ¼ 0=0 ¼ 1

Oops.
    The main problem here is that since any number multiplied
by 0 makes 0, we deduce that 0/0 can be any number whatsoever.
If the rules of arithmetic work, and division is the opposite of
multiplication, then 0/0 can take any numerical value. It’s not
unique. Best avoided, then.
    Hang on – if you divide by zero, don’t you get infinity?
    Sometimes mathematicians use that convention, yes. But
when they do, they have to check their logic rather carefully,
because ‘infinity’ is a slippery concept. Its meaning depends on
the context, and in particular you can’t assume that it behaves
like an ordinary number.
    And even when infinity makes sense, 0/0 still causes head-


...........................................
aches.