Wherefore Art Thou Borromeo?
Three rings can be linked together in such a way that if any one of
them is ignored, the remaining two would pull apart. That is, no
two of the rings are linked, only the full set of three. This
arrangement is generally known as the Borromean rings, after the
Borromeo family in Renaissance Italy, who used it as a family
emblem. However, the arrangement is much older, and can be
found in seventh-century Viking relics. Even in Renaissance Italy,
it goes back to the Sforza family; Francesco Sforza permitted the
Borromeos to use the rings in their coat of arms as a way of
thanking them for their support during the defence of Milan.




       Emblem of the Borromeo family and its use (bottom, left of
       centre) in their coat of arms.

    On Isola Bella, one of three islands in Lake Maggiore owned
by the Borromeo family, there is a seventeenth-century baroque
88 // Percentage Play



palazzo built by Vitaliano Borromeo. Here the three-ring emblem
can be found in numerous locations, indoors and out. A careful
observer (such as a topologist) will discover that the rings
depicted there are linked in several topologically distinct ways,
only one of which has the key feature that no two rings are
linked but all three are:




       Four variations on the Borromean rings from the family palazzo.

    The first version in the picture is the canonical one; it is inset
into a floor and also appears in the garden. The second appears
on the entrance tickets and on some of the flowerpots. A family
crest at the top of the main staircase has the third pattern. Black
and white seashells on the floor of a grotto under the palazzo
form the fourth pattern. For further information, visit
www.liv.ac.uk/~spmr02/rings/
    Look at the four versions and explain why they are
topologically different.
    Can you find an analogous arrangement of four rings, such
that if any ring is removed the remaining three can be pulled
apart, but the full set of four rings cannot be disentangled?


...........................................
   Answer on page 274