The Sausage Conjecture
This is one of my favourite unsolved mathematical problems,
and it is absolutely weird, believe me.
    As a warm-up, suppose you are packing a lot of identical
circles together in the plane, and ‘shrink-wrapping’ them by
surrounding the lot with the shortest curve you can. With 7
circles, you could try a long ‘sausage’:




       Sausage shape and wrapping.

    However, suppose that you want to make the total area inside
the curve – circles and the spaces between them – as small as
possible. If each circle has radius 1, then the area of the sausage is
27.141. But there is a better arrangement of the circles, a
hexagon with a central circle, and now the area is 25.533, which
is smaller:




                                   Hexagonal shape
                                   and wrapping.


    Curiously, if you use identical spheres instead of circles, and
shrink-wrap them with the surface of smallest possible area, then
for 7 spheres the long sausage shape leads to a smaller total
90 // Tom Fool’s Knot



volume than the hexagonal arrangement. This sausage pattern
gives the smallest volume inside the wrapping for any number of
spheres up to 56. But with 57 spheres or more, the minimal
arrangements are more rotund.
    Less intuitive still is what happens in spaces of four or more
dimensions. The arrangement of 4-dimensional spheres whose
wrapping gives the smallest 4-dimensional ‘volume’ is a sausage
for any number of spheres up to 50,000. It’s not a sausage for
100,000 spheres, though. So the packing of smallest volume uses
very long thin strings of spheres until you get an awful lot of
them. Nobody knows the precise number at which 4-dimen-
sional sausages cease to be the best.
    The really fascinating change probably comes at five dimen-
sions. You might imagine that in five dimensions sausages are
best for, say, up to 50 billion spheres, but then something more
rotund gives a smaller 5-dimensional volume; and for six
dimensions the same sort of thing holds up to 29 squillion
spheres, and so on. But in 1975 Laszlo Fejes Tóth formulated the
sausage conjecture, which states that for five or more dimensions,
the arrangement of spheres that occupies the smallest volume
when shrink-wrapped is always a sausage – however large the
number of spheres may be.
    In 1998 Ulrich Betke, Martin Henk and Jörg Wills proved that
Tóth was right for any number of dimensions greater than or


...........................................
equal to 42. To date, that’s the best we know.



Tom Fool’s Knot
This trick lets you tie a decorative knot while everybody watches.
When you challenge them to do the same, they fail. No matter
how many times you demonstrate the method, they seem unable
to copy it successfully.
                                              Tom Fool’s Knot // 91




       Stages in tying the Tom Fool’s knot.

     Take a length of soft cord about two metres long and hold it
across your palms as in the first diagram, with your hands about
half a metre apart. Let the two long ends hang down to
counterbalance the weight of the length between the palms.
Now bring your hands slowly together, all the while twiddling
the fingers of the right hand. The finger twiddles have nothing at
all to do with the method of tying the knot, but they distract
spectators from the important moves, all of which happen with
the left hand. Make the movements of your right hand seem as
purposeful as you can.
     With the left hand, first slide your thumb under the cord and
pick it up, as in the second diagram. Then rapidly withdraw your
fingers and replace them behind the hanging end, as shown by
the arrow in the second diagram, to reach the position of the
third figure. Without stopping, flip your fingers under the
horizontal length of cord, as shown by the arrow in the third
diagram, and withdraw your thumb. You should now have
reached the position shown in the fourth diagram. Finally, use
the tips of the fingers of each hand to grasp the end of cord
hanging from the other hand, as in the fifth diagram. Holding on
to the cord, pull the hands apart, and the lovely symmetrical
knot of the final diagram appears.
     Practice the method until you can perform it as a single,
rhythmic movement. The knot unties if you just pull on the ends
92 // New Merology



of the cord, so you can tie it over and over again. The trick


...........................................
becomes more mysterious every time you do it.