New Merology
Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast; for it
is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred threescore and
six. Revelation of St John 13:18
     Or maybe not. The Oxyrhynchus Papyri – ancient documents
found at Oxyrhynchus in Upper Egypt – include a fragment of
the Book of Revelation from the third or fourth century which
contains the earliest known version of some sections. The
number that this papyrus assigns to the Beast is 616, not 666. So
much for barcodes being symbols of evil.* No matter, for this
puzzle is not about the Beast. It is about an idea that its inventor,
Lee Sallows, calls ‘new merology’. Let me make it clear that his
proposal is not serious, except as a mathematical problem.{
     The traditional method for assigning numbers to names,
known as gematria, sets A ¼ 1, B ¼ 2 up to Z ¼ 26. Then you add
up all the numbers corresponding to the letters in the name. But
there are lots of different systems of this kind, and lots of
alphabets. Sallows suggested a more rational method based on
words that denote numbers. For instance, with the numbering
just described, the word ONE becomes 15 þ 14 þ 5 ¼ 34. However,


*   The middle of a supermarket barcode bears lines that would
    represent the number 666, except that they have an entirely
    different function – they are ‘guard bars’ that help to correct
    errors. Each guard bar has the binary pattern 101, which on a
    barcode represents 6. Whence 666. Except that genuine barcode
    numbers actually have seven binary digits, so that 6 is 1010000,
    and . . . oh well. This led some American fundamentalists to
    denounce barcodes as the work of the Devil. Since it now seems
    that the number of the Beast is actually 616, even the numerology
    is dodgy.
{   I really shouldn’t need to say this–but given the previous footnote
    ...
                                             New Merology // 93



the number corresponding to ONE surely ought to be 1. Worse,
no English number word denotes its numerological total, a
property we will call ‘perfect’.
    Sallows wondered what happens if you assign a whole
number to each letter, so that as many as possible of the number-
words ONE, TWO, and so on are perfect. To make the problem
interesting, different letters must be given different values. So
you get a whole pile of equations like

               OþNþE¼1
           TþWþO¼2
       TþHþRþEþE¼3

in algebraic unknowns O, N, E, T, W, H, R, . . . . And you must
solve them in integers, all distinct.
    The equation O þ N þ E ¼ 1 tells us that some of the numbers
have to be negative. Suppose, for example, that E ¼ 1 and N ¼ 2.
Then the equation for ONE tells us that O ¼ 2, and similar
equations with other number-words imply that I ¼ 4; T ¼ 7 and
W ¼ 3. To make THREE perfect we must assign values to H and
R. If H ¼ 3, then R has to be 9. FOUR involves two more new
letters, F and U. If F ¼ 5, then U = 10. Now, F þ I þ V þ E ¼ 5
leads to V ¼ 5. Since SIX contains two new letters, we try
SEVEN first, which tells us that S ¼ 8. Then we can fill in X from
SIX, getting X ¼ 6. The equation for EIGHT leads to G ¼ 7.
Now all the number names from ONE to TEN are perfect.
    The only extra letter in ELEVEN and TWELVE is L.
Remarkably, L ¼ 11 makes them both perfect. But
T þ H þ I þ R þ T þ E þ E þ N ¼ 7 þ 3 þ 4 þ ð9Þ þ 7 þ 1 þ 1 þ 2,
which is 16, so we get stuck at this point.
    In fact, we always get stuck at this point: if THIRTEEN is
perfect, then
       THREE þ TEN ¼ THIRTEEN
94 // Numerical Spell



and we can remove common letters from both sides. This leads
to E ¼ I, violating the rule that different letters get different
values.
    However, we can go the other way and try to make ZERO
perfect as well as ONE to TWELVE. Using the choices above,
Z þ E þ R þ O ¼ 0 leads to Z ¼ 10, but that’s the same as U.
    Can you find a different assignment of positive or negative
whole-number values to letters, so that all words from ZERO to
TWELVE are perfect?


...........................................
   Answer on page 275