What is the Golden Number?
The ancient Greek geometers discovered a useful idea which they
called ‘division in extreme and mean ratio’. By this they meant a
line AB being cut at a point P, so that the ratios AP : AB and
PB : AP are the same. Euclid used this construction in his work on
regular pentagons, and I’ll shortly explain why. But first, since
nowadays we have the luxury of replacing ratios by numbers,
let’s turn the geometric recipe into algebra. Take PB to be of
length 1, and let AP ¼ x, so that AB ¼ 1 þ x. Then the required
condition is
       1þx x
          ¼
        x   1
so that x2  x  1 ¼ 0. The solutions of this quadratic equation
are
                p
            1þ 5
       f¼          ¼ 1:618 034 . . .
               2
and
               p
            1 5
       1f¼      ¼ 0:618 034 . . .
              2
Here the symbol f is the Greek letter phi. The number f, known
as the golden number, has the pleasant property that its reciprocal
is
                  p
        1 1 þ 5
          ¼         ¼ 0:618 034 . . . ¼ f  1
        f       2
                                 What is the Golden Number? // 97



The golden number, in its geometric form as ‘division in extreme
and mean ratio’, was the starting point for the Greek geometry of
regular pentagons and anything associated with these, such as
the dodecahedron and the icosahedron. The connection is this:
if you draw a pentagon with sides equal to 1, then the long
diagonals have length f:




                                      How f appears in a
                                      regular pentagon.

     The golden ratio is often associated with aesthetics; in
particular, the ‘most beautiful’ rectangle is said to be one whose
sides are in the ratio f : 1. The actual evidence for such
statements is weak. Moreover, various methods of presenting
numerical data exaggerate the role of the golden ratio, so that it
is possible to ‘deduce’ the presence of the golden ratio in data
that bear no relation to it. Similarly, claims that famous ancient
buildings such as the Great Pyramid of Khufu or the Parthenon
were designed using the golden ratio are probably unfounded. As
with all numerology, you can find whatever you are looking for if
you try hard enough. (Thus ‘Parthenon’ has 8 letters, ‘Khufu’ has
5, and 8=5 ¼ 1:6 – very close to f.* )
     Another common fallacy is to suppose that the golden ratio
occurs in the spiral shell of a nautilus. This beautiful shell is – to
great accuracy – a type of spiral called a logarithmic spiral. Here
each successive turn bears a fixed ratio to the previous one. There
is a spiral of this kind for which this ratio equals the golden ratio.
But the ratio observed in the nautilus is not the golden ratio.

*   Well, actually ‘Parthenon’ has 9 letters, but for a moment I had
    you there. And 1.8 is a lot closer to f than many alleged instances
    of this number.
98 // What are the Fibonacci Numbers?




                                      The nautilus shell is a
                                      logarithmic spiral but its
                                      growth rate is not the
                                      golden number.

   The term ‘golden number’ is relatively modern. According to
the historian Roger Herz-Fischler, it was first used by Martin
Ohm in his book 1835 Die Reine Elementar-Mathematik (‘Pure
Elementary Mathematics’) as Goldene Schnitt (‘golden section’). It
does not go back to the ancient Greeks.
   The golden number is closely connected with the famous


...........................................
Fibonacci numbers, which come next.