What are the Fibonacci Numbers?
Many people met the Fibonacci numbers for the first time in Dan
Brown’s bestseller The Da Vinci Code. These numbers have a long
and glorious mathematical history, which has very little overlap
with anything mentioned in the book.
    It all began in 1202 when Leonardo of Pisa published the
Liber Abbaci, or ‘Book of Calculation’, an arithmetic text which
concentrated mainly on financial computations and promoted
the use of Hindu-Arabic numerals – the forerunner of today’s
familiar system, which uses just ten digits, 0 to 9, to represent all
possible numbers.
    One of the exercises in the book seems to have been
Leonardo’s own invention. It goes like this: ‘A man put a pair of
rabbits in a place surrounded on all sides by a wall. How many
pairs of rabbits are produced from that pair in a year, if it is
supposed that every month each pair produces a new pair, which
from the second month onwards becomes productive?’
                           What are the Fibonacci Numbers? // 99




                                             Family tree of of
                                             Fibonacci’s rabbits.

    Say that a pair is mature if it can produce offspring, and
immature if not.
    At the start, month 0, we have 1 mature pair.
    At month 1 this pair produces an immature pair, so we have 1
mature pair and 1 immature pair – 2 altogether.
    At month 2 the mature pair produces another immature pair;
the immature pair matures but produces nothing. So now we
have 2 mature pairs and 1 immature pair – 3 in total.
    At month 3 the 2 mature pairs produce 2 more immature
pairs; the immature pair matures but produces nothing. So now
we have 3 mature pairs and 2 immature pairs – 5 in total.
    At month 4 the 3 mature pairs produce 3 more immature
pairs; the 2 immature pairs mature but produce nothing. So now
we have 5 mature pairs and 3 immature pairs – 8 in total.
    Continuing step by step, we obtain the sequence
       1; 2; 3; 5; 8; 13; 21; 34; 55; 89; 144; 233; 377

for months 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 12. Here each term after the second is
the sum of the previous two. So the answer to Leonardo’s
question is 377.
    Some time later, probably in the eighteenth century,
Leonardo was given the nickname Fibonacci – ‘son of Bonaccio’.
This name was more catchy than Leonardo Pisano Bigollo, which
is what he used, so nowadays he is generally known as Leonardo
Fibonacci, and his sequence of numbers is known as the Fibonacci
sequence. The usual modern convention is to put the numbers 0,
1 in front, giving
       0; 1; 1; 2; 3; 5; 8; 13; 21; 34; 55; 89; 144; 233; 377
100 // What are the Fibonacci Numbers?



although sometimes the initial 0 is omitted. The symbol for the
nth Fibonacci number is Fn , starting from F0 ¼ 0.
    The Fibonacci numbers as such are pretty useless as a model
of the growth of real rabbit populations, although more general
processes of a similar kind, called Leslie models, are used to
understand the dynamics of animal and human populations.
Nevertheless, the Fibonacci numbers are important in several
areas of mathematics, and they also turn up in the natural world
– though less widely than is often suggested. Extensive claims
have been made for their occurrence in the arts, especially
architecture and painting, but here the evidence is mostly
inconclusive, except when Fibonacci numbers are used deliber-
ately – for instance, in the architect Le Corbusier’s ‘modulor’
system.
    The Fibonacci numbers have strong connections with the
golden number, which you’ll recall is
                p
             1þ 5
        f¼         ¼ 1:618 034 . . .
               2
Ratios of successive Fibonacci numbers, such as 8/5, 13/8, 21/13,
and so on become ever closer to f as the numbers get bigger. Or,
as mathematicians would say, > Fnþ1 =Fn tends to f as n tends to
infinity. For instance, 377=233 ¼ 1:618 025 . . . . In fact, for integers
of a given size, these Fibonacci fractions provide the best possible
approximations to the golden number. There is even a formula
for the nth Fibonacci number in terms of f:

               fn  ð1  fÞn
        Fn ¼        p
                      5
                                                          p
and this implies that Fn is the integer closest to fn = 5.
     If you make squares whose sides are the Fibonacci numbers
they fit together very tidily, and you can draw quarter-circles in
them to create an elegant Fibonacci spiral. Because Fn is close to
fn , this spiral is very close to a logarithmic spiral, which grows in
size by f every quarter-turn. Contrary to many claims, this spiral
                           What are the Fibonacci Numbers? // 101



is not the same shape as the Nautilus shell’s spiral. Look at the
picture on page 98 – the Nautilus is more tightly wound.




       Fibonacci spiral.

    However, there is a genuine – and striking – occurrence of
Fibonacci numbers in living creatures, namely plants. The
flowers of surprisingly many species have a Fibonacci number of
petals. Lilies have 3 petals, buttercups have 5, delphiniums have
8, marigolds have 13, asters have 21, and most daisies have 34, 55
or 89. Sunflowers often have 55, 89 or 144.
    Other numbers of petals do occur, but much less frequently.
Mostly these are twice a Fibonacci number, or a power of 2.
Sometimes numbers are from the related Lucas sequence:
       1; 3; 4; 7; 11; 18; 29; 47; 76; 123; . . .

where again each number after the second is the sum of the
previous two, but the start of the sequence is different.
   There seem to be genuine biological reasons for these
numbers to occur. The strongest evidence can be seen in the
heads of daisies and sunflowers, when the seeds have formed.
Here the seeds arrange themselves in spiral patterns:
102 // What are the Fibonacci Numbers?




                                         The head of
                                         a daisy.

     In the daisy illustrated, the eye sees one family of spirals that
twist clockwise, and a second family of spirals that twist
anticlockwise. There are 21 clockwise spirals and 34 anti-
clockwise spirals – successive Fibonacci numbers. Similar
numerical patterns, also involving successive Fibonacci numbers,
occur in pine cones and pineapples.
     The precise reasons for Fibonacci numerology in plant life are
still open to debate, though a great deal is understood. As the tip
of the plant shoot grows, long before the flowers appear, regions
of the shoot form tiny bumps, called primordia, from which the
seeds and other key parts of the flower eventually grow.
Successive primordia form at angles of 137.58 – or 222.58 if we
subtract this from 3608, measuring it the other way round. This is
a fraction f  1 of the full circle of 3608. This occurrence of the
golden ratio can be predicted mathematically if we assume that
the primordia are packed as efficiently as possible. In turn,
efficient packing is a consequence of elastic properties of the
growing shoot – the forces that affect the primordia. The genetics
of the plant is also involved. Of course, many real plants do not
quite follow the ideal mathematical pattern. Nevertheless, the
mathematics and geometry associated with the Fibonacci
sequence provide significant insights into these numerical


...........................................
features of plants.
                                         The Plastic Number // 103