Why Call It a Witch?
Maria Agnesi was born in 1718 and died in 1799. She was the
daughter of a wealthy silk merchant, Pietro Agnesi (often
wrongly said to have been a professor of mathematics at
Bologna), and the eldest of his 21 children. Maria was
precocious, and published an essay advocating higher education
for women when she was nine years old. The essay was actually
written by one of her tutors, but she translated it into Latin and
delivered it from memory to an academic gathering in the
garden of the family home. Her father also arranged for her to
debate philosophy in the presence of prominent scholars and
public figures. She disliked making a public spectacle of herself
and asked her father for permission to become a nun. When he
refused, she extracted an agreement that she could attend church
whenever she wished, wear simple clothing, and be spared from
all public events and entertainments.
110 // Why Call It a Witch?




                                     Maria Gaetana Agnesi.

    From that time on, she focused on religion and mathematics.
She wrote a book on differential calculus, printed privately
around 1740. In 1748 she published her most famous work,
Instituzioni Analitiche ad Uso Della Gioventù Italiana (‘Analytical
Institutions for the Use of the Youth of Italy’). In 1750 Pope
Benedict XIV invited her to become professor of mathematics at
the University of Bologna, and she was officially confirmed in
the role, but she never actually attended the university because
this would not have been in keeping with her humble lifestyle.
As a result, some sources say she was a professor and others say
she wasn’t. Was she, or wasn’t she? Yes.
    There is a famous curve, called the ‘witch of Agnesi’, which
has the equation

       xy2 ¼ a2 ða  xÞ

where a is a constant. The curve looks remarkably unlike a witch –
it isn’t even pointy:




       Witch of Agnesi.
                                        Möbius and His Band // 111



   So how did this strange name get attached to the curve?
   Fermat was the first to discuss this curve, in about 1700.
Maria Agnesi wrote about the curve in her book Instituzione
Analitiche. The word ‘witch’ was a mistake in translation. In 1718
Guido Grandi named the curve ‘versoria’, a Latin term for a rope
that turns a sail, because that’s what it looked like. In Italian this
term became ‘versiera’, which is what Agnesi called it. But John
Colson, who translated various mathematics books into English,
mistook ‘la versiera’ for ‘l’aversiera’, meaning ‘the witch’.


...........................................
   It could have been worse. Another meaning is ‘she-devil’.



Möbius and His Band
There are some pieces of mathematical folklore that you really
should be reminded about, even though they’re ‘well known’ –
just in case. An excellent example is the Möbius band.
    Augustus Möbius was a German mathematician, born 1790,
died 1868. He worked in several areas of mathematics, including
geometry, complex analysis and number theory. He is famous for
his curious surface, the Möbius band. You can make a Möbius
band by taking a strip of paper, say 2 cm wide and 20 cm long,
bending it round until the ends meet, then twisting one end
through 1808, and finally gluing the ends together. For
comparison, make a cylinder in the same way, omitting the
twist.




                                      Möbius band.




                                      Cylindrical band.
112 // Möbius and His Band



    The Möbius band is famous for one surprising feature: it has
only one side. If an ant crawls around on a cylindrical band, it
can cover only half the surface – one side of the band. But if an
ant crawls around on the Möbius band, it can cover the entire
surface. The Möbius band has only one side.
    You can check these statements by painting the band. You
can paint the cylinder so that one side is red and the other is
blue, and the two sides are completely distinct, even though they
are separated only by the thickness of the paper. But if you start
to paint the Möbius band red, and keep going until you run out
of band to paint, the whole thing ends up red.
    In retrospect, this is not such a surprise, because the 1808
twist connects each side of the original paper strip to the other. If
you don’t twist before gluing, the two sides stay separate. But
until Möbius (and a few others) thought this one up, mathe-
maticians didn’t appreciate that there are two distinct kinds of
surface: those with two sides, and those with one. This turned
out to be important in topology. And it showed how careful you
have to be about making ‘obvious’ assumptions.
    There are lots of Möbius band recreations. Here are three.

. If you cut the cylindrical band along the middle with scissors,
    it falls apart into two cylindrical bands. What happens if you
    try this with a Möbius band?
.   Repeat, but this time make the cut about one-third of the way
    across the width of the band. Now what happens to the
    cylinder, and to the band?
.   Make a band like a Möbius band but with a 3608 twist. How
    many sides does it have? What happens if you cut it along the
    middle?

The Möbius band is also known as a Möbius strip, but this can
lead to misunderstandings, as in a Limerick written by science
fiction author Cyril Kornbluth:
                                       Three More Quickies // 113



       A burleycue dancer, a pip
       Named Virginia, could peel in a zip;
          But she read science fiction
          and died of constriction
       Attempting a Möbius strip.
A more politically correct Möbius limerick, which gives away one
of the answers, is:
       A mathematician confided
       That a Möbius strip is one-sided.
           You’ll get quite a laugh
           if you cut it in half,
       For it stays in one piece when divided.


...........................................
   Answers on page 277