Miles of Tiles
Bathroom walls and kitchen floors provide everyday examples of
tiling patterns, using real tiles, plastic or ceramic. The simplest
pattern is made from identical square tiles, fitted together like
the squares of a chessboard. Over the centuries, mathematicians
and artists have discovered many beautiful tilings, and mathe-
maticians have gone a stage further by seeking all possible tilings
with particular features.
     For instance, exactly three regular polygons tile the entire
infinite plane – that is, identical tiles of that shape cover the
plane without overlaps or gaps. These polygons are the
equilateral triangle, the square and the hexagon:




       The three regular polygons that tile the plane.

    We can be confident that no other regular polygon tiles the
plane, by thinking about the angles at which the edges of the
tiles meet. If several tiles meet at a given point, the angles
involved must add to 3608. So the angle at the corner of a tile is
3608 divided by a whole number, say 360/m. As m gets larger, this
angle gets smaller. In contrast, as the number of sides of a regular
polygon increases, the angle at each corner gets bigger. The effect
                                                 Miles of Tiles // 115



of this is to ‘sandwich’ m within very narrow limits, and this in
turn restricts the possible polygons.
    The details go like this. When m ¼ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and so on,
360/m takes the values 360, 180, 120, 90, 72, 60, 5137, and so on.
The angle at the corner of a regular n-gon, for n = 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and
so on, is 60, 90, 108, 120, 12847, and so on. The only places where
these lists coincide are when m ¼ 3, 4, and 6; here n ¼ 6, 4 and 3.
    Actually, this proof as stated has a subtle flaw. What have I
forgotten to say?
    The most striking omission from my list is the regular
pentagon, which does not tile the plane. If you try to fit regular
pentagonal tiles together, they don’t fit. When three of them
meet at a common point, the total angle is 361088 ¼ 3248, less
than 3608. But if you try to make four of them meet, the total
angle is 461088 ¼ 4328, which is too big.
    Irregular pentagons can tile the plane, and so can innumer-
able other shapes. In fact, 14 distinct types of convex pentagon
are known to tile the plane. It is probable, but not yet proved,
that there are no others. You can find all 14 patterns at
www.mathpuzzle.com/tilepent.html
mathworld.wolfram.com/PentagonTiling.html
    The mathematics of tilings has important applications in
crystallography, where it governs how the atoms in a crystal can
be arranged, and what symmetries can occur. In particular,
crystallographers know that the possible rotational symmetries
of a regular lattice of atoms is tightly constrained. There are
2-fold, 3-fold, 4-fold and 6-fold symmetries – meaning that the
arrangement of atoms looks identical if the whole thing is
rotated through 12, 13, 14 or 16 of a full turn (3608). However,
5-fold symmetries are impossible – just as the regular pentagon
cannot tile the plane.
    There the matter stood until 1972, when Roger Penrose
discovered a new type of tiling, using two types of tile, which he
called kites and darts:
116 // Miles of Tiles




       A kite (left) and dart (right). The matching rules require the thick
       and thin arcs to meet at any join – see the pictures below.

    These shapes are derived from the regular pentagon, and the
associated tilings are required to obey certain ‘matching rules’
where several tiles meet, to avoid simple repetitive patterns.
Under these conditions, the two shapes can tile the plane, but
not by forming a repetitive lattice pattern. Instead, they form a
bewildering variety of complicated patterns. Precisely two of
these, called the star and sun patterns, have exact fivefold
rotational symmetry.




       The two fivefold-symmetric Penrose tilings. Left: star pattern;
       right: sun pattern. Tinted lines illustrate the matching rules.
       Black lines are edges of tiles.

   It then turned out that nature knows this trick. Some
chemical compounds can form ‘quasicrystals’ using Penrose
patterns for their atoms. These forms of matter are not regular
                                              Chaos Theory // 117



lattices, but they can occur naturally. So Penrose’s discovery
changed our ideas about natural arrangements of atoms in
crystal-like structures.
    The detailed mathematics and crystallography are too
complicated to describe here. To find out more, go to:
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penrose_tiling


...........................................
   Answers on page 278