Chaos Theory
If you want your friends to accept you as a ‘rocket scientist’, you
have to be able to spout about chaos theory. You will casually
mention the butterfly effect, and then you get to talk about
where Pluto (no longer a planet but a mere dwarf planet) will be
in 200 million years’ time, and how really good dishwashers
work.
    Chaos theory is the name given by the media to an important
new discovery in dynamical systems theory – the mathematics of
systems that change over time according to specific rules. The
name refers to a surprising and rather counterintuitive type of
behaviour known as deterministic chaos. A system is called
deterministic if its present state completely determines its future
behaviour; if not, the system is called stochastic or random.
Deterministic chaos – universally shortened to ‘chaos’ – is
apparently random behaviour in a deterministic dynamical
system. At first sight, this seems to be a contradiction in terms,
but the issues are quite subtle, and it turns out that some features
of deterministic systems can behave randomly.
    Let me explain why.
    You may remember the bit in Douglas Adams’s The Hitch
Hiker’s Guide to the Galaxy that parodies the concept of
determinism. No, really, you do – remember the supercomputer
Deep Thought? When asked for the answer to the Great Question
of Life, the Universe and Everything, it ruminates for five million
118 // Chaos Theory



years, and finally delivers the answer as 42. The philosophers
then realise that they didn’t actually understand the question,
and an even greater computer is given the task of finding it.
    Deep Thought is the literary embodiment of a ‘vast intellect’
envisaged by one of the great French mathematicians of the
eighteenth century, the Marquis de Laplace. He observed that
the laws of nature, as expressed mathematically by Isaac Newton
and his successors, are deterministic, saying that: ‘An intellect
which at a certain moment knew all forces that set nature in
motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is
composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these
data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the
movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of
the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be
uncertain and the future just like the past would be present
before its eyes.’
    In effect, Laplace was telling us that any deterministic system
is inherently predictable – in principle, at least. In practice,
however, we have no access to a Vast Intellect of the kind he had
in mind, so we can’t carry out the calculations that are needed to
predict the system’s future. Well, maybe for a short period, if
we’re lucky. For example, modern weather forecasts are fairly
accurate for about two days, but a ten-day forecast is often badly
wrong. (When it isn’t, they’ve got lucky.)
    Chaos raises another objection to Laplace’s vision: even if his
Vast Intellect existed, it would have to know ‘all positions of all
items’ with perfect accuracy. In a chaotic system, any uncertainty
about the present state grows very rapidly as time passes. So we
quickly lose track of what the system will be doing. Even if this
initial uncertainty first shows up in the millionth decimal place
of some measurement – with the previous 999,999 decimal
places absolutely correct – the predicted future based on one
value for that millionth decimal place will be utterly different
from a prediction based on some other value.
    In a non-chaotic system such uncertainties grow fairly
slowly, and very long-term predictions can be made. In a chaotic
                                              Chaos Theory // 119



system, inevitable errors in measuring its state now mean that its
state a short time ahead may be completely uncertain.
    A (slightly artificial) example may help to clarify this effect.
Suppose that the state of some system is represented by a real
number – an infinite decimal – between 0 and 10. Perhaps its
current value is 5.430 874, say. To keep the maths simple,
suppose that time passes in discrete intervals – 1, 2, 3, and so on.
Let’s call these intervals ‘seconds’ for definiteness. Further,
suppose that the rule for the future behaviour is this: to find the
‘next’ state – the state one second into the future – you take the
current state, multiply by 10, and ignore any initial digit that
would make the result bigger than 10. So the current value
5.430 874 becomes 54.308 74, and you ignore the initial digit 5 to
get the next state, 4.308 74. Then, as time ticks on, successive
states are:

       5:430 874
       4:308 74
       3:0874
       0:874
       8:74
       7:4

and so on.
     Now suppose that the initial measurement was slightly
inaccurate, and should have been 5.430 824 – differing in the
fifth decimal place. In most practical circumstances, this is a very
tiny error. Now the predicted behaviour would be:

       5:430824
       4:30824
       3:0824
       0:824
       2:4

See how that 2 moves one step to the left at each step – making
the error ten times as big each time. After a mere 5 seconds, the
120 // Chaos Theory



first prediction of 7.4 has changed to 2.4 – a significant
difference.
     If we had started with a million-digit number, and changed
the final digit, it would have taken a million seconds for the
change to affect the predicted first digit. But a million seconds is
only 1112 days. And most mathematical schemes for predicting
the future behaviour of a system work with much smaller
intervals of time – thousandths or millionths of seconds.
     If the rule for moving one time-step into the future is
different, this kind of error may not grow as quickly. For
example, if the rule is ‘divide the number by 2’, then the effect of
such a change dies away as we move further and further into the
future. So what makes a system chaotic, or not, is the rule for
forecasting its next state. Some rules exaggerate errors, some
filter them out.
     The first person to realise that sometimes the error can grow
rapidly – that the system may be chaotic, despite being
deterministic – was Henri Poincaré, in 1887. He was competing
for a major mathematical prize. King Oscar II of Norway and
Sweden offered 2,500 crowns to anyone who could calculate
whether the solar system is stable. If we wait long enough, will
the planets continue to follow roughly their present orbits, or
could something dramatic happen – such as two of them
colliding, or one being flung away into the depths of interstellar
space?
     This problem turned out to be far too difficult, but Poincaré
managed to make progress on a simpler question – a hypothet-
ical solar system with just three bodies. The mathematics, even
in this simplified set-up, was still extraordinarily difficult. But
Poincaré was up to the task, and he convinced himself that this
‘three-body’ system sometimes behaved in an irregular, unpre-
dictable manner. The equations were deterministic, but their
solutions were erratic.
     He wasn’t sure what to do about that, but he knew it must be
true. He wrote up his work, and won the prize.
                                            Chaos Theory // 121




                                                    Complicated
                                                    orbits for
                                                    three bodies
                                                    moving
                                                    under
                                                    gravity.

    And that was what everyone thought until recently. But in
1999 the historian June Barrow-Green discovered a skeleton in
Poincaré’s closet. The published version of his prizewinning
paper was not the one he submitted, not the one that won the
prize. The version he submitted – which was printed in a major
mathematical journal – claimed that no irregular behaviour
would occur. Which is the exact opposite of the standard story.
    Barrow-Green discovered that shortly after winning the prize,
an embarrassed Poincaré realised he had blundered. He withdrew
the winning memoir and paid for the entire print run of the
journal to be destroyed. Then he put his error right, and the
official published version is the corrected one. No one knew that
there had been a previous version until Barrow-Green discovered
a copy tucked away among the archives of the Mittag-Leffler
Institute in Stockholm.
    Anyway, Poincaré deserves full credit as the first person to
appreciate that deterministic mathematical laws do not always
imply predictable, regular behaviour. Another famous advance
was made by the meteorologist Edward Lorenz in 1961. He was
running a mathematical model of convection currents on his
computer. The machines available in those days were very slow
and cumbersome compared with what we have now – your
mobile phone is a far more powerful computer than the top
research machine of the 1960s. Lorenz had to stop his computer
in the middle of a long calculation, so he printed out all the
122 // Chaos Theory



numbers it had found. Then he went back several steps, input the
numbers at that point, and restarted the calculation. The reason
for backtracking was to check that the new calculation agreed
with the old one, to eliminate errors when he fed the old figures
back in.
    It didn’t.
    At first the new numbers were the same as the old ones, but
then they started to differ. What was wrong? Eventually Lorenz
discovered that he hadn’t typed in any wrong numbers. The
difference arose because the computer stored numbers to a few
more decimal places than it printed out. So what it stored as
2.371 45, say, was printed out as 2.371. When he typed that
number in for the second run, the computer began calculating
using 2.371 00, not 2.371 45. The difference grew – chaotically –
and eventually became obvious.
    When Lorenz published his results, he wrote: ‘One meteor-
ologist remarked that if the theory were correct, one flap of a




       (Left) Initial conditions for eight weather forecasts, apparently
       identical but with tiny differences. (Right) The predicted
       weather a week later – the initial differences have grown
       enormously. Italian weather is more predictable than British.
       [Courtesy of the European Medium Range Weather Forecasting
       Centre, Reading.]
                                                Chaos Theory // 123



seagull’s wings could change the course of weather for ever.’ The
objection was intended as a put-down, but we now know that
this is exactly what happens. Weather forecasters routinely make
a whole ‘ensemble’ of predictions, with slightly different initial
conditions, and then take a majority vote on the future, so to
speak.
    Before you rush out with a shotgun, I must add that there are
billions of seagulls, and we don’t get to run the weather twice.
What we end up with is a random selection from the range of
possible weathers that might have happened instead.
    Lorenz quickly replaced the seagull by a butterfly, because
that sounded better. In 1972 he gave a lecture with the title ‘Does
the flap of a butterfly’s wings in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas?’
The title was invented by Philip Merilees when Lorenz failed to
provide one. Thanks to this lecture, the mathematical point
concerned became known as the butterfly effect. It is a
characteristic feature of chaotic systems, and it is why they are
unpredictable, despite being deterministic. The slightest change
to the current state of the system can grow so rapidly that it
changes the future behaviour. Beyond some relatively small
‘prediction horizon’, the future must remain mysterious. It may
be predetermined, but we can’t find out what has been
predetermined, except by waiting to see what happens. Even a
big increase in computer speed makes little difference to this
horizon, because the errors grow so fast.
    For weather, the prediction horizon is about two days ahead.
For the solar system as a whole, it is far longer. We can predict
that in 200 million years’ time, Pluto will still be in much the
same orbit as it is today; however, we have no idea on which side
of the Sun it will be by then. So some features are predictable,
others are not.
    Although chaos is unpredictable, it is not random. This is the
whole point. There are hidden ‘patterns’, but you have to know
how to find them. If you plot the solutions of Lorenz’s model in
three dimensions, they form a beautiful, complicated shape
124 // Après-le-Ski



called a strange attractor. If you plotted random data that way,
you’d just get a fuzzy mess.




       The Lorenz attractor, a geometric representation of Lorenz’s
       calculations.

    Chaos may seem a useless phenomenon, on the grounds that
it prevents practical predictions. Even is this objection were
correct, chaos would still exist. The real world is not obliged to
behave in ways that are convenient for humans. As it happens,
there are ways to make use of chaos. For a time, a Japanese
company marketed a chaotic dishwasher, with two rotary arms
spraying water on its contents. The resulting irregular spray
cleaned the dishes better than the regular spray from a single
rotating arm would have done.
    And, of course, a dishwasher based on chaos theory was
obviously very scientific and advanced. The marketing people


...........................................
must have loved it.



Après-le-Ski
The little-known Alpine village of Après-le-Ski is situated in a
deep mountain valley with vertical cliffs on both sides. The cliffs
are 600 metres high on one side and 400 metres high on the
other. A cable car runs from the foot of each cliff to the top of the
                                             Pick’s Theorem // 125



other cliff, and the cables are perfectly straight. At what height
above the ground do the two cables cross?




                                     Find the height
                                     of the crossing.



...........................................
   Answer on page 278



Pick’s Theorem
Here is a lattice polygon: a polygon whose vertices lie on the
points of a square lattice. Assuming that the points are spaced at
intervals of one unit, what is the area of the polygon?




                                     A lattice polygon.

   There’s a wonderfully simple way to find such areas, however
complicated the polygon may be – by using Pick’s theorem. It was
proved by Georg Pick in 1899. For any lattice polygon, the area A
can be calculated from the number of boundary points B (grey)
and interior points I (black) by the formula

       A ¼ 12 B þ I  1

Here B ¼ 20 and I ¼ 8, so the area is 12 620 þ 8  1 ¼ 17 square
units.
126 // Mathematical Prizes



   What is the area of the lattice polygon in the second
diagram?




                                     Find the area.




...........................................
   Answer on page 279