Mathematical Prizes
There is no Nobel Prize in mathematics, but there are several
equally prestigious prizes and a vast range of smaller ones,
among them:

Fields Medal
The Fields Medal was instituted by the Canadian mathematician
John Charles Fields and was first awarded in 1936. Every four
years the International Mathematical Union selects for the award
up to four of the world’s leading research mathematicians, who
must be under 40 years old. The prize consists of a gold medal
and a small sum of money – currently around $13,500 – but is
considered equivalent to a Nobel Prize in prestige.

Abel Prize
In 2001 the Norwegian government commemorated the 200th
anniversary of the birth of Niels Henrik Abel – one of the all-time
greats of mathematics – with a new prize. Each year, one or more
mathematicians share a prize in the region of $1,000,000, which
is comparable to the sum that Nobel Prize winners receive. The
King of Norway presents the award at a special ceremony.
                                       Mathematical Prizes // 127



Shaw Prize
Sir Run Run Shaw, a prominent figure in Hong Kong’s media and
a long-standing philanthropist, established an annual prize for
three areas of science: astronomy, life sciences and medicine, and
mathematics. The total value awarded each year is $1,000,000,
and there is also a medal. The first Shaw Prize was awarded in
2002.

Clay Millennium Prizes
The Clay Mathematics Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
founded by Boston businessman Landon T. Clay and Lavinia D.
Clay, offers seven prizes, each of $1,000,000, for the definitive
solution of seven major open problems. These ‘Millennium Prize
Problems’ were selected to represent some of the biggest
challenges facing mathematicians. For the record, they are:

. The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture in algebraic
   number theory.
. The Hodge Conjecture in algebraic geometry.
. The existence of solutions, valid for all time, to the Navier–
   Stokes equations of fluid dynamics.
. The P = NP? problem in computer science.
. The Poincaré Conjecture in topology.
. The Riemann Hypothesis in complex analysis and the theory
   of prime numbers.
. The mass gap hypothesis and associated issues for the Yang–
   Mills equations in quantum field theory.

None of the prizes has yet been awarded, but the Poincaré
Conjecture has now been proved. The main breakthrough was
made by Grigori Perelman, and many details were clarified by
other mathematicians. For details of the seven problems, see
www.claymath.org/millennium/

King Faisal International Prize
Between 1977 and 1982 the King Faisal Foundation instituted
prizes for service to Islam, Islamic studies, Arabic literature,
medicine and science. The science prize is open to, and has been
128 // Why No Nobel for Maths?



won by, mathematicians. The winner receives a certificate, a gold
medal and SR 750 000 ($200,000).

Wolf Prize
Since 1978 this prize has been awarded by the Wolf Foundation,
set up by Ricardo Wolf and his wife Francisca Subirana Wolf. It
covers five areas of science: agriculture, chemistry, mathematics,
medicine and physics. The prize consists of a diploma and
$100,000.

Beal Prize
In 1993 Andrew Beal, a Texan with a passion for number theory,
was led to conjecture that if ap þ bq ¼ cr , where a, b, c, p, q and r
are positive integers, and p, q and r are all greater than 2, then a, b
and c must have a common factor. In 1997 he offered a prize,


...........................................
later increased to $100,000, for a proof or disproof.