Why No Nobel for Maths?
Why didn’t Alfred Nobel set up a mathematics prize? There’s a
persistent story that Nobel’s wife had an affair with the Swedish
mathematician Gosta Mittag-Leffler, so Nobel hated mathemat-
icians. But there’s a problem with this theory, because Nobel
never married. Some versions of the story replace the hypothet-
ical wife with a fiancée or a mistress. Nobel may have had a
mistress – a Viennese lady called Sophie Hess – but there’s no
evidence that she had anything to do with Mittag-Leffler.
    An alternative theory holds that Mittag-Leffler, who became
quite wealthy himself, did something to annoy Nobel. Since
Mittag-Leffler was the leading Swedish mathematician of the
time, Nobel realised that he was very likely to win a prize for
mathematics, and decided not to set one up. However, in 1985
Lars Gårding and Lars Hörmander noted that Nobel left Sweden
in 1865, to live in Paris, and seldom returned – and in 1865
Mittag-Leffler was a young student. So there was little opportu-
nity for them to interact, which casts doubt on both theories.
                                  Is There a Perfect Cuboid? // 129



    It’s true that late in Nobel’s life, Mittag-Leffler was chosen to
negotiate with him about leaving to the Stockholm Högskola
(which later became the University) a significant amount of
money in his will, and this attempt eventually failed – but
presumably Mittag-Leffler wouldn’t have been chosen if he’d
already offended Nobel. In any case, Mittag-Leffler wasn’t likely
to win a mathematical Nobel if one existed – there were plenty of
more prominent mathematicians around. So it seems more likely
that it simply never occurred to Nobel to award a prize for
mathematics, or that he considered the idea and rejected it, or
that he didn’t want to spend even more cash.
    Despite this, several mathematicians and mathematical
physicists have won the prize for work in other areas – physics,
chemistry, physiology/medicine, even literature. They have also
won the ‘Nobel’ in economics – the Prize in Economic Sciences
in Memory of Alfred Nobel, established by the Sveriges Riksbank


...........................................
in 1968.