Hippopotamian Logic
       I won’t eat my hat.
       If hippos don’t eat acorns, then oak trees will grow in
       Africa.
       If oak trees don’t grow in Africa, then squirrels hibernate
       in winter.
       If hippos eat acorns and squirrels hibernate in winter,
       then I’ll eat my hat.
       Therefore – what?


...........................................
   Answer on page 280
                                              Langton’s Ant // 141



Langton’s Ant
Langton’s ant was invented by Christopher Langton, and it
shows how amazingly complex simple ideas can be. It leads to
one of the most baffling unsolved problems in the whole of
mathematics, and all from astonishingly simple ingredients.
    The ant lives on an infinite square grid of black and white
cells, and it can face in one of the four compass directions: north,
south, east or west. At each tick of a clock it moves one cell
forward, and then follows three simple rules:

. If it lands on a black cell it makes a 908 turn to the left.
. If it lands on a white cell it makes a 908 turn to the right.
. The cell that it has just vacated then changes colour, from
   white to black, or vice versa.




                                                     Effect of the
                                                     ant moving.
                                                     Grey cells can
                                                     be any colour
                                                     and do not
                                                     change on this
                                                     move.

   As a warm-up, the ant starts by facing east on a completely
white grid. Its first move takes it to a white square, while the
square it started from turns black. Because it is on a white square,
the ant’s next move is a right turn, so now it faces south. That
142 // Langton’s Ant



takes it to a new white square, and the square it has just vacated
turns black. After a few more moves the ant starts to revisit earlier
squares that have turned black, so it then turns to the left
instead. As time passes, the ant’s motion gets quite complicated,
and so does the ever-changing pattern of black and white squares
that trails behind it.
    Jim Propp discovered that the first few hundred moves
occasionally produce a nice, symmetrical pattern. Then things
get rather chaotic for about ten thousand moves. After that, the
ant gets trapped in a cycle in which the same sequence of 104
moves is repeated indefinitely, each cycle moving it two squares
diagonally. It continues like this for ever, systematically building
a broad diagonal ‘highway’.




                                        Langton’s ant builds a
                                        highway.

    This ‘order out of chaos’ behaviour is already puzzling, but
computer experiments suggest something more surprising. If you
scatter any finite number of black squares on the grid, before the
ant sets off, it still ends up building a highway. It may take longer
to do so, and its initial movements may be very different, but
ultimately that’s what will happen. As an example, the second
diagram shows a pattern that forms when the ant starts inside a
solid rectangle. Before building its highway, the ant builds a
‘castle’ with straight walls and complicated crenellations. It
keeps destroying and rebuilding these structures in a curiously
purposeful way, until it gets distracted and wanders off –
building a highway.
                                               Pig on a Rope // 143




                                             Pattern created by
                                             Langton’s ant when it
                                             starts inside a black
                                             rectangle. The highway
                                             is at the lower right.
                                             Small white dots mark
                                             squares of the original
                                             rectangle that have
                                             never been visited.

     The problem that is baffling mathematicians is to prove that
the ant always ends up building a highway, for every initial
configuration of finitely many black squares. Or disprove that, if
it’s wrong. We do know that the ant can never get trapped inside
any bounded region of the grid – it always escapes if you wait


...........................................
long enough. But we don’t know that it escapes along a highway.