Turtles All the Way Down
Infinity is a slippery idea. People talk fairly casually of ‘eternity’ –
an infinite period of time. According to the Big Bang theory, the
universe came into being about 13 billion years ago. Not only
156 // Turtles All the Way Down



was there no universe before then – there was no ‘before’ before
then.* Some people worry about that, and most of them seem
much happier with the idea that the universe ‘has always
existed’. That is, its past has already been infinitely long.
    This alternative seems to solve the difficult question of the
origin of the universe, by denying that it ever had an origin. If
something has always been here, it’s silly to ask why it’s here
now. Isn’t it?
    Probably. But that still doesn’t explain why it’s always been
here.
    This can be a difficult point to grasp. To bring it into
perspective, let me compare it with a rather different proposal.
There is an amusing (and very likely true) tale that a famous
scientist – Stephen Hawking is often mentioned because he told
the story in A Brief History of Time – was giving a lecture about the
universe, and a lady in the audience pointed out that the Earth
floats in space because it rests on the back of four elephants,
which in turn rest on the back of a turtle.
    ‘Ah, but what supports the turtle?’ the scientist asked.
    ‘Don’t be silly,’ she said. ‘It’s turtles all the way down!’




                             Turtles all the
                             way down.


*   Some cosmologists now think that there could have been
    something before the Big Bang after all – our universe may be
    part of a ‘multiverse’ in which individual universes could come
    into existence or fade away again. The theory is nice, but it’s
    difficult to find any way to test it.
                                                 Hilbert’s Hotel // 157



    All very amusing, and we don’t buy that explanation. A self-
supporting pile of turtles is ludicrous, and not just because it’s
turtles. Each turtle being supported by a previous one just
doesn’t look like an explanation of how the whole pile stays up.
    Very well. But now replace the Earth by the present state of
the universe, and replace each turtle by the previous state of the
universe. Oh, and change ‘support’ to ‘cause’. Why does the
universe exist? Because a previous one did. Why did that one
exist? Because a previous one did. Did it all start a finite time in
the past? No, it’s universes all the way back.*
    So a universe that has always existed is at least as puzzling as


...........................................
one that has not.



Hilbert’s Hotel
Among the paradoxes concerning the infinite are a series of
bizarre events at Hilbert’s Hotel. David Hilbert was one of the
world’s leading mathematicians around 1900. He worked in the
logical foundations of mathematics and took a particular interest
in infinity. Anyway, Hilbert’s Hotel has infinitely many rooms,
numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on – every positive integer.
    One bank holiday weekend, the hotel was completely full. A
traveller without a reservation arrived at reception wanting a
room. In any finite hotel, no matter how big, the traveller would
be out of luck – but not in Hilbert’s Hotel.
    ‘No problem, sir,’ said the manager. ‘I’ll ask the person in
Room 1 to move to Room 2, the person in Room 2 to move to
Room 3, the person in Room 3 to move to Room 4, and so on.
The person in Room n will move to Room n þ 1. Then Room 1
will be free, so I’ll put you there.’




*   Part of the appeal of the multiverse approach is that it revives the
    ‘it’s always been here’ point of view. Our universe hasn’t, but the
    surrounding multiverse has. It’s multiverses all the way back . . .
158 // Hilbert’s Hotel




       All move up one, and Room 1 is free.

    This trick works in an infinite hotel. In a finite hotel it goes
wrong, because the person in the room with the biggest number
has nowhere to go. But in Hilbert’s Hotel there is no biggest room
number. Problem sorted.
    Ten minutes later, an Infinity Tours coach arrived, with
infinitely many passengers sitting in seats 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on.
    ‘Well, I can’t fit you in by asking every other guest to move
up some number of places,’ said the manager. ‘Even if they all
moved up a million places, that would only free up a million
rooms.’ He thought for a moment. ‘Nevertheless, I can still fit
you in. I’ll ask the person in Room 1 to move to Room 2, the
person in Room 2 to move to Room 4, the person in Room 3 to
move to Room 6, and so on. The person in Room n will move to
Room 2n. That frees up all the odd-numbered rooms, so now I
can put the person in Seat 1 of your bus into Room 1, the person
in Seat 2 into Room 3, the person in Seat 3 into Room 5, and so
on. The person in Seat n will move to Room 2n  1.’




       How to accommodate an infinite bus-load.

   However, the manager’s troubles were still not over. Ten
minutes later, he was horrified to see infinitely many Transfinity
Travel buses arriving in his (infinite) car park.
                                               Hilbert’s Hotel // 159



     He rushed out to meet them. ‘We’re full – but I can still fit you
all in!’
     ‘How?’ asked the driver of Bus 1.
     ‘I’ll reduce you to a problem I’ve already solved,’ said the
manager. ‘I want you to move everyone into Bus 1.’
     ‘But Bus 1 is full! And there are infinitely many other buses!’
     ‘No problem. Line up all your buses side by side, and
renumber all the seats using a diagonal order.’




       The Manager’s ‘diagonal’ order – the numbers 2–3, 4–5–6,
       7–8–9–10, and so on slant to the left.

    ‘What does that achieve?’ asked the driver.
    ‘Nothing – yet. But notice: each passenger, in each of your
infinitely many buses, is assigned a new number. Every number
occurs exactly once.’
    ‘And your point is—?’
    ‘Move each passenger to the seat in Bus 1 that corresponds to
their new number.’
    The driver did so. Then everyone was sitting in Bus 1, and all
the other buses were empty – so they drove away.
    ‘Now I’ve got a full hotel and just one extra bus-load,’ said


...........................................
the manager. ‘And I already know how to deal with that.’
160 // Continuum Coaches