Continuum Coaches
You won’t be surprised to hear that the Hilbert’s Hotel eventually
ran into an accommodation problem that the manager could not
solve. This time the hotel was completely empty – not that this
ever seemed to make much difference. Then one of Cantor’s
Continuum Coaches stopped at the front door.
    Georg Cantor was the first to sort out the mathematics of
infinite sets. And he discovered something remarkable about the
‘continuum’ – the real number system. A real number is one that
can be written as a decimal, which can either stop after finitely
many digits, like 1.44, or go on for ever, like p. Here’s what
Cantor found.
    The seats of the Continuum Coach were numbered using real
numbers, not positive integers.
    ‘Well,’ the manager thought, ‘one infinity is just like any
other, right?’ So he assigned passengers to rooms, and eventually
the Hotel was full and the lobby was empty. The manager sighed
with relief. ‘Everyone has a room,’ he said to himself.
    Then a forlorn figure came in through the revolving doors.
    ‘Good evening,’ said the manager.
    ‘My name is Mr Diagonal. Geddit? Missed-a-diagonal. You’ve
missed me out, mate.’
    ‘Well, I can always bump everyone up one room—’
    ‘No, mate, you said ‘‘Everyone has a room’’ – I heard you. But
I don’t.’
    ‘Nonsense! You’ve gone to your room, then nipped out the
back and come in the front. I know your kind!’
    ‘No, mate – I can prove I’m not in any of your rooms. Who’s
in Room 1?’
    ‘I can’t reveal personal information about guests.’
    ‘What’s the first decimal place of their coach seat?’
    ‘I suppose I can reveal that. It’s a 2.’
    ‘My first digit is 3. So I’m not the person in Room 1, mate.
Agreed?’
    ‘Agreed.’
                                      A Puzzling Dissection // 161



     ‘What’s the second decimal place of the coach seat of the
person in Room 2?’
     ‘It’s a 7.’
     ‘My second digit is 5. So I’m not the person in Room 2.’
     ‘That makes sense.’
     ‘Yeah, mate, and it goes on doing that. What’s the third
decimal place of the coach seat of the person in Room 3?’
     ‘It’s a 4.’
     ‘My third digit is 8. So I’m not the person in Room 3.’
     ‘Hmm. I think I see where this is headed.’
     ‘Too right, mate. My nth digit is different from the nth digit
of the person in Room n, for every n. So I’m not in Room n. Like I
said, you left me out.’
     ‘And like I said, I can always bump everyone up one place and
fit you in.’
     ‘No use, mate. There’s infinitely many more just like me out
there, sitting in your car park waiting for a room. However you
assign passengers to rooms, there’s going to be someone on the
coach whose nth digit is different from the nth digit of the
person in Room n, for every n. Hordes of them, in fact. You’ll
always miss people out.’
     Now, you understand that Cantor didn’t quite write his proof
in those terms, but that was the basic idea. He proved that the
infinite set of real numbers can’t be matched, one for one, with
the infinite set of whole numbers. Some infinities are bigger than


...........................................
others.