A Really Puzzling Dissection
‘The area can’t change when the pieces are reassembled in a
different way.’
    Hmmm.
    In 1924 two Polish mathematicians, Stefan Banach and
Alfred Tarski, proved that it is possible to dissect a sphere into
finitely many pieces, which can then be rearranged to make two
spheres – each the same size as the original. No overlaps, no
missing bits – the pieces fit together perfectly. This result has
become known as the Banach–Tarski paradox, although it’s a
perfectly valid theorem and the only element of paradox is that
it seems to be obviously false.




       It can be done – but not with pieces like these.

      Hang on, though. Surely, if you cut a sphere into several
pieces, the total volume of the pieces must be the same as that of
the sphere. So however you reassemble the pieces, the total
volume can’t change. But two identical spheres have twice the
volume of a single sphere (of the same size). You don’t have to be
a genius to see that it can’t be done! In fact, if it could be done,
then you could start with a gold sphere, cut it up, fit the pieces
back together, and end up with twice as much gold. Then repeat
. . . But you can’t get something for nothing.
      Hang on, though. Let’s not be so hasty.
      The argument about gold is inconclusive, because mathe-
matical concepts do not always model the real world exactly. In
mathematics, volumes can be subdivided into indefinitely small
pieces. In the real world, you hit problems at the atomic scale.
This could spoil things if we try to use gold.
      In contrast, the argument about volumes looks watertight.
But there’s a tiny loophole in the logic: the tacit assumption that
164 // A Really Puzzling Dissection



the separate pieces have well-defined volumes. ‘Volume’ is such a
familiar concept that we tend to forget just how tricky it can be.
    None of this means that Banach and Tarski were right; it just
explains why they are not obviously wrong. Unlike the nice
polygonal pieces in Mathophila’s dissection of a chessboard, the
Banach–Tarski ‘pieces’ are more like disconnected clouds of
infinitely small dust specks than solid lumps. They are so
complicated, in fact, that their volumes cannot be defined – not
if we want them to obey the usual rule ‘when you combine
several pieces, their volumes add’. And if that rule fails, the
argument about volumes comes to bits. The single sphere, and
two copies of it, have well-defined volumes. But the intermediate
stages, when they are cut into pieces, aren’t like that.
    What are they like? Well . . . not like that.
    Banach and Tarski realised that this loophole might actually
make their paradoxical dissection possible. They proved that:

. You can split a single sphere A into finitely many very
   complicated, possibly disconnected, parts.
. You can do the same to two spheres B and C, the same size as A.
. You can accomplish all of that in such a way that the parts of
   B and C together correspond exactly to the parts of A.
. You can arrange for corresponding parts to be perfect copies
   of one another.

The proof of the Banach–Tarski paradox is complicated and
technical, and it requires a set-theoretic assumption known as
the axiom of choice. This particular assumption worries some
mathematicians. However, the fact that it leads to the Banach–
Tarski paradox is not what worries them, and is no reason to
reject it. Why not? Because the Banach–Tarski paradox isn’t
really very paradoxical. With the right intuition, we would
expect such paradoxical dissections to be possible.
    Let me try to give you that intuition. It all hinges on the weird
behaviour of what are called infinite sets. Although a sphere has
finite size, it contains infinitely many points. That leaves room for
the weirdness of infinity to show up in the geometry of the sphere.
                                A Really Puzzling Dissection // 165



       A useful analogy involves the English alphabet, the 26 letters
A, B, C, . . . , Z. These letters can be combined to make words, and
we list permissible words in a dictionary. Suppose we allow all
possible sequences of letters, as long or as short as we like. So
AAAAVDQX is a word, and so is GNU, and so is ZZZ . . . Z with ten
million Z’s. We can’t print such a dictionary, but to mathemat-
icians it is a well-defined set which contains infinitely many words.
       Now, we can dissect this dictionary into 26 pieces. The first
piece contains all words starting with A, the second contains all
words starting with B, and so on, with the 26th piece containing
all words starting with Z. These pieces do not overlap, and every
word occurs in exactly one piece.
       Each piece, however, has exactly the same structure as the
original dictionary. The second piece, for example, contains the
words BAAAAVDQX, BGNU and BZZZ . . . Z. The third contains
CAAAAVDQX, CGNU and CZZZ . . . Z. You can convert each
piece into the entire dictionary by lopping off the first letter from
every word.
       In other words: we can cut the dictionary apart, and
reassemble the pieces to make 26 exact copies of the dictionary.
       Banach and Tarski found a way to do the same kind of thing
with the infinite set of all points in a solid sphere. Their alphabet
consisted of two different rotations of the sphere; their words
were sequences of these rotations. By playing a more compli-
cated version of the dictionary game with the rotations, you can
create an analogous dissection of the sphere. Since there are now
two ‘letters’ in the alphabet, we convert the original sphere into
two identical copies.
       Careful readers will observe that I’ve cheated slightly in the
interests of simplicity. When I chop off the initial letter B from
the second piece, for instance, I not only get the entire original
dictionary: I also get the ‘empty’ word that arises when the initial
B is deleted from the word B. So really my dissection turns the
dictionary into 26 copies of itself, plus 26 extra words A, B, C,
. . . , Z of length 1. To keep everything neat and tidy, we have to
absorb the extra 26 words into the pieces. A similar problem
166 // Nothing Up My Sleeve . . .



occurs in Banach and Tarski’s construction – but this is a very
fine point. If we ignore it, we still double the sphere – we just
have a few extra points left over. Which is just as suprising.
    After Banach and Tarski proved their theorem, mathemat-
icians began to wonder how few pieces you could get away with.
In 1947 Abraham Robinson proved that it can be done with five
pieces, but no fewer. If you are willing to ignore a single point at
the centre of the sphere, this number reduces to four.
    The Banach–Tarski paradox isn’t really about dissecting
spheres. It is about the impossibility of defining a sensible


...........................................
concept of ‘volume’ for really complicated shapes.



Nothing Up My Sleeve . . .
How can you remove a loop of string from your arm without
taking your hand out of your jacket pocket?
    More precisely: take a two-metre length of string and tie its
ends together to form a closed loop. Put on your jacket, button it
up, and put your arm through a loop and into the side pocket.
Now you have to remove the loop without taking your hand out
of your pocket – and without sliding the loop into the pocket to
sneak it out over the ends of your fingers.




                            Remove the string without removing
                            your hand from your pocket.




...........................................
   Answer on page 286
                                         Two Perpendiculars // 167



Nothing Down My Leg . . .
Once your audience has learned to solve the previous problem,
ask someone to try the same thing, still wearing the jacket, but
with his hand in his trouser pocket.


...........................................
   Answer on page 287