Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum?
The backcloth depicted a striking scene: the Rhine valley by
moonlight. In the pit, the orchestra was rehearsing Wagner’s
Götterdämmerung. The story had reached the tragic death of
Siegfried, and the conductor, Otto Fenderbender, raised his
baton for the beginning of the ‘Funeral March’. First, just
tympani, an intricate repeated rhythm in a low C sharp . . .
                       Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum? // 169



    ‘No, no, no!’ screamed Fenderbender, hurling his baton to
the floor. ‘Not like that, you incompetent pigs!’
    The leading tympanist, somewhat unwisely, protested. ‘But
Herr Fenderbender, the rhythm was absolutely pre—’
    ‘Rhythm, schmythm!’ said Fenderbender.
    ‘The tempo was exactly as the score indic—’
    ‘I am not complaining about the tempo!’ screamed the
conductor.
    ‘The pitch was a perfect C shar—’
    ‘Pitch? Pitch? Of course the pitch was perfect! I heard that for
myself when the orchestra was tuning up! I have an inherent
sense of pitch!’
    ‘Then what—’
    ‘The shape, you fool! The shape!’
    The lead tympanist looked perplexed. It was hard to describe.
Otto tried to express what he had heard. ‘One of the drums
sounded too . . . well, too square,’ he said. ‘The other tympani
had their usual . . . rounded sound, but one of them— well, it had
corners.’
    ‘Come now, Herr Fenderbender – surely you’re not claiming
you can hear the shape of a drum?’
    ‘I heard what I heard,’ Otto said doggedly. ‘One of the drums
is too square.’
    And, what do you know? He was right. It’s the Bessel
functions, you see.




                                                       Some
                                                       vibrational
                                                       modes of a
                                                       circular
                                                       drum.

   Let me explain. When a drum beats, it produces several
170 // Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum?



different notes at once, each note corresponding to a different
mode of vibration. Each has its own frequency, or equivalently,
pitch. Euler calculated the vibrational spectrum of a circular
drum – the list of frequencies of these basic modes – using
mathematical gadgets called Bessel functions. For a square drum
you get sines and cosines instead. In both cases there are
characteristic patterns of nodal lines, where the drum remains
stationary. At any given instant, the drum is displaced upwards
on one side of a nodal line, and downwards on the other. As the
drum vibrates, each region between the nodal lines oscillates up
and down. Fast oscillations create a high-pitched sound, slow
oscillations make the pitch lower.




                                                     Some of the
                                                     modes of a
                                                     square drum.

    The mathematics of vibrations proves that the shape of a
drum determines its list of frequencies – basically, what it can
sound like. But can we go the other way, and deduce the shape
from the sound? In 1966 Mark Kac made that question precise:
given the spectrum, is it possible to find the shape of the drum?
    Kac’s question is much more important than its quirky
formulation might suggest. When an earthquake hits, the entire
Earth rings like a bell, and seismologists deduce a great deal
about the internal structure of our planet from the ‘sound’ that it
produces and the way those sounds echo around as they bounce
off different layers of rock. Kac’s question is the simplest one we
can ask about such techniques. ‘Personally, I believe that one
cannot ‘‘hear’’ the shape,’ Kac wrote. ‘But I may well be wrong
and I am not prepared to bet large sums either way.’
                       Can You Hear the Shape of a Drum? // 171



     The first significant evidence that Kac was right showed up in
a higher-dimensional analogue of the problem. John Milnor
wrote a one-page paper proving that two distinct 16-dimensional
tori (generalised doughnuts, basically) have the same spectrum.
The first results for ordinary 2-dimensional drums were in a more
positive direction: various features of the shape can be deduced
from the spectrum. Kac himself proved that the spectrum of a
drum determines its area and perimeter. A curious consequence
is that you can hear whether or not a drum is circular, because a
circle has the smallest perimeter for a given area. If you know the
area A and the perimeter p, and it so happens that p2 ¼ 4pA – as it
is for a circle – then the drum is a circle, and vice versa. So when
Fenderbender said that tympani should have a nice ‘rounded’
sound, he knew what he was talking about.
     In 1989 Carolyn Gordon, David Webb and Scott Wolpert
answered Kac’s question by constructing two distinct math-
ematical drums that produce an identical range of sounds. Since
then, simpler examples have been found. So now we know that
there are limits to what information can be deduced from a
shape’s vibrational spectrum.




       The first example of two sound-alike drums with different


...........................................
       shapes.
172 // What is e, and Why?