Many Knees, Many Seats
A polyhedron is a solid with finitely many flat (that is, planar)
faces. Faces meet along lines called edges; edges meet at points
called vertices. The climax of Euclid’s Elements is a proof that there
are precisely five regular polyhedrons, meaning that every face is a
regular polygon (equal sides, equal angles), all faces are identical,
and each vertex is surrounded by exactly the same arrangement of
faces. The five regular polyhedrons (also called regular solids) are:

. the tetrahedron, with 4 triangular faces, 4 vertices and 6 edges
. the cube or hexahedron, with 6 square faces, 8 vertices and
   12 edges
. the octahedron, with 8 triangular faces, 6 vertices and 12 edges
. the dodecahedron, with 12 pentagonal faces, 20 vertices and
   30 edges
. the icosahedron, with 20 triangular faces, 12 vertices and
   30 edges.




       The five regular solids.
                                    Many Knees, Many Seats // 175



    The names start with the Greek word for the number of faces,
and ‘hedron’ means ‘face’. Originally it meant ‘seat’, which isn’t
quite the same thing. While we’re discussing linguistics, the
‘-gon’ in ‘polygon’ originally meant ‘knee’ and later acquired the
technical meaning of ‘angle’. So a polygon has many knees, and
a polyhedron has many seats.
    The regular solids arise in nature – in particular, they all occur
in tiny organisms known as radiolarians. The first three also
occur in crystals; the dodecahedron and icosahedron don’t,
although irregular dodecahedra are sometimes found.




       Radiolarians shaped like the regular solids.

    It’s quite easy to make models of polyhedrons out of card, by
cutting out a connected set of faces – called the net of the solid –
folding along edges, and gluing or taping appropriate pairs of
edges together. It helps to add flaps to one edge of each such pair,
as shown.
176 // Many Knees, Many Seats




       Nets of the regular solids.

   Here’s a bit of arcane lore: if the edges are of unit length, then
the volumes of these solids (in cubic units) are:
                  p
.   Tetrahedron: 122 *0:117 851
.   Cube: 1     p
.   Octahedron: 32 *0:471
                     p
                            405
                       5 4
.   Dodecahedron:p 2
                        f  *7:663 12
.   Icosahedron: 65 f2 *2:181 69

Here f is the golden number (page 96), which turns up
whenever you have pentagons around – just as p turns up
whenever you have spheres or circles. And * means ‘approxi-
mately equals’.
    Analogues of the regular polyhedrons can be defined in
spaces of 4 or more dimensions, and are called polytopes. There
are six regular polytopes in 4 dimensions, but only three regular


...........................................
polytopes in 5 dimensions or more.
                                             Euler’s Formula // 177



Euler’s Formula
The regular solids have a curious pattern which turns out to be
far more general. If F is the number of faces, E the number of
edges and V the number of vertices, then
       FEþV ¼2

for all five solids. In fact, the same formula holds for any
polyhedron that has no ‘holes’ in it – one that is topologically
equivalent to a sphere. This relation is called Euler’s formula, and
its generalisations to higher dimensions are important in
topology.
    The formula also applies to a map in the plane, provided we
consider the infinite region outside the map to be an extra face –
or ignore this ‘face’ and replace the formula by
       FEþV ¼1

which amounts to the same thing but is easier to think about. I’ll
call this expression Euler’s formula for maps.
    The diagram shows, using a typical example, why this
formula is true. The value of F  E þ V is written underneath
each step in the process. The method of proof is to simplify the
map, one step at a time. If we choose a face adjacent to the
outside of the map, and remove that face and an adjacent outside
edge, then both F and E decrease by 1. This leaves F  E
unchanged. Since we haven’t altered V, it also leaves F  E þ V
unchanged. We can keep erasing a face and a corresponding edge
until all faces have been removed. We are left with a network of
edges and vertices, and this always forms a ‘tree’ – there are no
closed loops of edges. In the example in the diagram, this stage is
reached at the sixth step, when F  E þ V ¼ 0  7 þ 8.
178 // Euler’s Formula




       Proof of Euler’s formula for maps in the plane.

    Now we simplify the tree by snipping off one ‘branch’ – an
edge on the end of the tree plus the vertex on the outside end of
that edge – at a time. Now F remains at 0, while E and V both
decrease by 1 with each snip. Again, F  E þ V remains
unchanged. Eventually, a single vertex remains. Now
F ¼ 0; E ¼ 0 and V ¼ 1. So at the end of the process,
F  E þ V ¼ 1. Since the process does not change this quantity, it
must also have been equal to 1 when we started.
    The proof explains why the signs alternate – plus, minus, plus
– as we go from faces to edges to vertices. A similar trick works for
higher-dimensional topology, for much the same reason.
    There is a hidden topological assumption in the proof: the
map is drawn in the plane. Equivalently, when considering
polyhedrons, they must be ‘drawable’ on the surface of a sphere.
If the polyhedron or map lives on a surface that is topologically
distinct from a sphere, such as a torus, then the method of proof
can be adapted but the final result is slightly different. For
example, the formula for polyhedrons becomes
       FEþV ¼0

when the polyhedron is topologically equivalent to a torus. As an
example, this ‘picture frame’ polyhedron has F ¼ 16; E ¼ 32 and
V ¼ 16:
                                            What Day is It? // 179




       Picture frame polyhedron.

   On a surface with g holes, the formula becomes
       F  E þ V ¼ 2  2g

so we can calculate the number of holes by drawing a
polyhedron on the surface. In this manner, an ant that inhabited
the surface and could not perceive it ‘from outside’ would still be
able to work out the topology of the surface. Today’s cosmolo-
gists are trying to work out the topological shape of our own
universe – which we can’t observe ‘from outside’ – by using more


...........................................
elaborate topological ideas of a similar kind.