What is the Square Root of Minus One?
The square root of a number is a number whose square is the
given one. For instance, the square root of 4 is 2. If we allow
negative numbers, then 2 is a second square root of 4 because
minus times minus makes plus. Since plus times plus also makes
plus, the square of any number – positive or negative – is always
positive. So it looks as though negative numbers, in particular
1, can’t have square roots.
    Despite this, mathematicians (and physicists and engineers
and indeed anyone working in any branch of science) have
found it useful to provide 1 with a square root. This is not a
number in the usual sense, so it is given a new symbol, which is i
if you are a mathematician, and j if you are an engineer.
    Square roots of negative numbers first showed up in
mathematics around 1450, in an algebra problem. In those days
the idea was a huge puzzle, because people thought of a number
as something real. Even negative numbers caused a great deal of
head-scratching, but people quickly got accustomed to them
when they realised how useful they could be. Much the same
happened with i, but it took a lot longer.
    A big issue was how to visualise i geometrically. Everyone had
got used to the idea of the number line, like an infinitely long
ruler, with positive numbers on the right and negative ones on
the left, and fractions and decimals in between:
                    What is the Square Root of Minus One? // 185




                                           The ‘real’ number line.

    Collectively, these familiar kinds of number became known
as real numbers, because they correspond directly to physical
quantities. You can observe 3 cows or 2.73 kilograms of sugar.
    The puzzle was that there seemed to be nowhere on the real
number line for the ‘new’ number i. Eventually, mathematicians
realised that it didn’t have to go on the real number line. In fact,
being a new kind of number, it couldn’t go there. Instead, i had to
live on a second line, at right angles to the real number line:




                                            The ‘imaginary’ number
                                            line, placed at right
                                            angles to the real one.

   And if you added an imaginary number to a real one, the
answer had to live in the plane defined by the two lines:




                                            A complex number is a
                                            real one plus an
                                            imaginary one.
186 // The Most Beautiful Formula



    Multiplication was more complicated. The main point was
that multiplying a number by i rotated it around the origin O
through a right angle, anticlockwise. For instance, 3 multiplied
by i is 3i, and that’s what you get when you rotate the point
labelled 3 through 908.
    The new numbers extended the familiar real number line to a
larger space, a number plane. Three mathematicians discovered
this idea independently: the Norwegian Caspar Wessel, the
Frenchman Jean-Robert Argand and the German Carl Friedrich
Gauss.
    Complex numbers don’t turn up in everyday situations, such
as checking the supermarket bill or measuring someone for a
suit. Their applications are in things like electrical engineering
and aircraft design, which lead to technology that we can use
without having to know the underlying mathematics.


...........................................
    The engineers and designers need to know it, though.