The Most Beautiful Formula
Occasionally people hold polls for the most beautiful mathe-
matical formula of all time – yes, they really do, I’m not making
this up, honest – and nearly always the winner is a famous
formula discovered by Euler, which uses complex numbers to
link the two famous constants e and p. The formula is

       eip ¼ 1

and it is extremely influential in a branch of maths known as


...........................................
complex analysis.



Why is Euler’s Beautiful Formula True?
I often get asked whether there is a simple way to explain why
Euler’s formula eip ¼ 1 is true. It turns out that there is, but
                      Why is Euler’s Beautiful Formula True? // 187



some preparation is needed – about two years of undergraduate
mathematics.
    This is uncomfortably like the joke about the professor who
says in a lecture that some fact is obvious, and when challenged
goes away for half an hour and returns to say ‘yes, it is obvious,’
and then continues lecturing without further explanation. It just
takes two years instead of half an hour. So I’m going to give you
the explanation. Skip this bit if it doesn’t make sense – but it does
illustrate how higher mathematics sometimes gains new insights
by putting different ideas together in unexpected ways. The
necessary ingredients are some geometry, some differential
equations and a bit of complex analysis.
    The main idea is to solve the differential equation
       dz
          ¼ iz
       dt
where z is a complex function of time t, with the initial
condition zð0Þ ¼ 1. It is standard in differential equations courses
that the solution is

       zðtÞ ¼ eit

Indeed, you can define the exponential function ew this way.




                                              Geometry of the
                                              differential equation.


    Now let’s interpret the equation geometrically.
Multiplication by i is the same as rotation through a right angle,
so iz is at right angles to z. Therefore the tangent vector iz(t) to
the solution at any point z(t) is always at right angles to the
188 // Your Call May be Monitored for Training Purposes



‘radius vector’ from 0 to z(t) and has length 1. Therefore the
solution z(t) always lies in the unit circle, and the point z(t)
moves round this circle with angular velocity 1 measured in
radians per second. (The radian measure of an angle is the length
of the arc of the unit circle corresponding to that angle.) The
circumference of the unit circle is 2p, so t ¼ p is halfway round
the circle. But halfway round is visibly the point z ¼ 1.
Therefore eip ¼ 1, which is Euler’s formula.
    All the ingredients of this proof are well known, but the
overall package seems not to get much prominence. Its big
advantage is to explain why circles (leading to p) have anything
to do with exponentials (defined using e). So given the right


...........................................
background, Euler’s formula ceases to be mysterious.



Your Call May be Monitored for Training
Purposes
‘The number you have dialled is imaginary. Please rotate your


...........................................
phone 90 degrees and try again.’