Fractals – The Geometry of Nature
Every so often, an entire new area of mathematics arises. One of
the best known in recent times is fractal geometry, pioneered by
Benoı̂t Mandelbrot, who coined the term ‘fractal’ in 1975.
Roughly speaking, it is a mathematical method for coming to
grips with apparent irregularities in the natural world, and
revealing hidden structure. The subject is best known for its
beautiful, complex computer graphics, but it goes far deeper than
that.
190 // Fractals – The Geometry of Nature




                                                       Part of the
                                                       Mandelbrot
                                                       set, a famous
                                                       fractal.

    The traditional shapes of Euclidean geometry are triangles,
squares, circles, cones, spheres, and the like. These shapes are
simple, and in particular they have no fine structure. If you
magnify a circle, for instance, any portion of it looks more and
more like a featureless straight line. Shapes like this have played a
prominent role in science – for instance, the Earth is close to a
sphere, and for many purposes that level of detail is good
enough.
    Many natural shapes are far more complex. Trees are a mass
of branches, clouds are fuzzy and convoluted, mountains are
jagged, coastlines are wiggly . . . To understand these shapes
mathematically, and to solve problems about them, we need new
ingredients. The supply of problems, by the way, is endless – how
do trees dissipate the energy of the wind, how do waves erode a
coastline, how does water run off mountains into rivers? These
are practical issues, often related to ecology and the environ-
ment, not just theoretical problems.
    Coastlines are a good example. They are wiggly curves, but
you can’t use any old wiggly curve. Coastlines have a curious
property: they look much the same on any scale of map. If the
map shows more detail, extra wiggles can be distinguished. The
exact shape changes, but the ‘texture’ seems pretty much the
same. The jargon here is ‘statistically self-similar’. All statistical
features of a coastline, such as what proportion of bays have a
                         Fractals – The Geometry of Nature // 191



given relative size, are the same no matter what scale of
magnification you work on.
    Mandelbrot introduced the word fractal to describe any shape
that has intricate structure no matter how much you magnify it.
It doesn’t have to be statistically self-similar – but such fractals
are easier to understand. And those that are exactly self-similar
are even nicer, which is how the subject started.
    About a century ago, mathematicians invented a spate of
weird shapes, for various esoteric purposes. These shapes were
not just statistically self-similar – they were exactly self-similar.
When suitably magnified, the result looked identical to the
original. The most famous is the snowflake curve, invented by
Helge von Koch in 1904. It can be assembled from three copies of
the curve shown in the right-hand diagram.




       The snowflake curve and successive stages in its construction.

    This component curve (though not the whole snowflake) is
exactly self-similar. You can see that each stage in the
construction is made from four copies of the previous stage, each
one-third as big. The four copies are fitted together as in Stage 1.
Passing to the infinite limit, we obtain an infinitely intricate
curve that is built from four copies of itself, each one-third the
size – so it is self-similar.
192 // Fractals – The Geometry of Nature




                                              Each quarter of the
                                              curve, blown up to three
                                              times the size, looks like
                                              the original curve.

    This shape is too regular to represent a real coastline, but it
has about the right degree of wiggliness, and less regular curves
formed in a similar way do look like genuine coastlines. The
degree of wiggliness can be represented by a number, called the
fractal dimension.
    To see how this goes, I’m going to take some simpler non-
fractal shapes and see how they fit together at different scales of
magnification. If I break a line into pieces 1/5 the size, say, then I
need 5 of them to reconstruct the line. With a square, I need 25
pieces, which is 52 . And with cubes I need 125, which is 53 .




       Effect of scaling on ‘cubes’ in 1, 2 and 3 dimensions.

    The power of 5 occurring here is the same as the dimension
of the shape concerned: 1 for a line, 2 for a square, 3 for a cube.
In general, if the dimension is d and we have to fit k pieces of size
1/n together to reassemble the original shape, then k ¼ nd .
Taking logarithms, we find that
            log k
       d¼
            log n
                         Fractals – The Geometry of Nature // 193



Now, taking a deep breath, we try this formula out on the
snowflake. Here we need k ¼ 4 pieces each 1/3 the size, so n ¼ 3.
Therefore our formula yields
            log 4
       d¼
            log 3

which is roughly 1.2618. So the ‘dimension’ of the snowflake
curve is not a whole number!
    That would be bad if we wanted to think of ‘dimension’ in
the conventional way, as the number of independent directions
available. But it’s fine if we want a numerical measure of
wiggliness, based on self-similarity. A curve with dimension
1.2618 is more wiggly than a curve of dimension 1, such as a
straight line; but it is less wiggly than a curve of dimension 1.5,
say.
    There are dozens of technically distinct ways to define the
dimension of a fractal. Most of them work when it is not self-
similar. The one used by mathematicians is called the Hausdorff–
Besicovitch dimension. It’s a pig to define and a pig to calculate,
but it has pleasant properties. Physicists generally use a simpler
version, called the box dimension. This is easy to calculate, but
lacks nearly all the pleasant properties of the Hausdorff–
Besicovitch dimension. Despite that, the two dimensions are
often the same. So the term fractal dimension is used to mean
either of them.
    Fractals need not be curves: they can be highly intricate
surfaces or solids, or higher-dimensional shapes. The fractal
dimension then measures how rough the fractal is, and how
effectively it fills space. The fractal dimension turns up in most
applications of fractals, both in the theoretical calculations and
in experimental tests. For example, the fractal dimension of real
coastlines is generally close to 1.25 – surprisingly close to that of
the snowflake curve.
    Fractals have come a long way, and they are now routinely
used as mathematical models throughout the sciences. They are
also the basis of an effective method for compressing computer
194 // Fractals – The Geometry of Nature



files of video images. But their most interesting role is as ‘the’
geometry of many natural forms. A striking example is a kind of
cauliflower called Romanesco broccoli. You can find it in most
supermarkets. Each tiny floret has much the same form as the
whole cauliflower, and everything is arranged in a series of ever-
smaller Fibonacci spirals. This example is the tip of an iceberg –
the fractal structure of plants. While much remains to be sorted
out, it is already clear that the fractal structure arises from the
way plants grow, which in turn is regulated by their genetics. So
the geometry here is more than just a visual pun.




                                                    Romanesco
                                                    broccoli – you
                                                    can’t get much
                                                    more self-
                                                    similar than
                                                    that!

    The applications of fractals are extensive, ranging from the
fine structure of minerals to the form of the entire universe.
Fractal shapes have been used to make antennas for mobile
phones – such shapes are more efficient. Fractal image com-
pression techniques cram huge quantities of data on to CDs and
DVDs. There are even medical applications: for example, fractal
geometry can be used to detect cancerous cells, whose surfaces
are wrinkly and have a higher fractal dimension than normal
cells.
    About ten years ago a team of biologists (Geoffrey West,
James Brown and Brain Enquist) discovered that fractal geometry
can explain a long-standing puzzle about patterns in living
creatures. The patterns concerned are statistical ‘scaling laws’.
For example, the metabolic rates of many animals seem to be
proportional to the 34th power of their masses, and the time it
                          Fractals – The Geometry of Nature // 195



takes for the embryo to develop is proportional to the 14th
power of the mass of the adult. The main enigma here is that
fraction 14. A power law with the value 13 could be explained in
terms of volume, which is proportional to the cube of the
creature’s length. But 14, and related fractions such as 34 or 14, are
harder to explain.
    The team’s idea was an elegant one: a basic constraint on
how organisms can grow is the transport of fluids, such as blood,
around the body. Nature solves this problem by building a
branching network of veins and arteries. Such a network obeys
three basic rules: it should reach all regions of the body, it should
transport fluids using as little energy as possible, and its smallest
tubes should all be much the same size (because the tube can’t be
smaller than a single blood cell, or the blood can’t flow). What
shapes satisfy these conditions? Space-filling fractals – with the
fine structure cut off at the limiting size, that of the single cell.
This approach – which takes into account some important
physical and biological details, such as the flexibility of the tubes
and the occurrence of pulses in the blood as the heart beats –
predicts that elusive 14th power.




                                                        Fractal
                                                        branching of
                                                        blood vessels
                                                        in the lungs.

...........................................
196 // The Missing Symbol