The Riemann Hypothesis
If there is one single problem that mathematicians would dearly
love to solve, it is the Riemann Hypothesis. Entire areas of
mathematics would open up if some bright spark could prove
this wonderful theorem. And entire areas of mathematics would
close down if some bright spark could disprove it. Right now,
those areas are in limbo. We can get a glimpse of the Promised
Land, but for all we know it might be a mirage.
    Oh, there’s also a million-dollar prize on offer from the Clay
Mathematics Institute.
    The story goes back to the time of Gauss, around 1800, and
the discovery that although the prime numbers seem rather
randomly distributed doing the number line, they have clear
statistical regularities. Various mathematicians noticed that the
number of primes up to some number x, denoted by pðxÞ just to
216 // The Riemann Hypothesis



confuse everyone who thought that p ¼ 3:141 59, is approxi-
mately
                  x
       pðxÞ ¼
                log x

Gauss found what seemed to be a slightly better approximation,
the logarithmic integral
               Z x
                     dx
       LiðxÞ ¼
                 2 log x

Now, it’s one thing to notice this ‘prime number theorem’, but
what counts is proving it, and that turned out to be hard. The
most powerful approach is to turn the question into something
quite different, in this case complex analysis. The connection
between primes and complex functions is not at all obvious, but
the key idea was spotted by Euler.
   Every positive integer is a product of primes in a unique way.
We can formulate this basic property analytically. A first attempt
would be to notice that

       ð1 þ 2 þ 22 þ 23 þ . . .Þ6ð1 þ 3 þ 32 þ 33 þ . . .Þ
       6ð1 þ 5 þ 52 þ 53 þ . . .Þ6 . . .

with each bracketed series going on for ever, and taking the
product over all primes, is equal to
       1 þ 2 þ 3 þ 4 þ 5 þ 6 þ 7 þ 8 þ ...

summed over all integers. For example, to find out where a
number like 360 comes from, we write it as a product of primes

       360 ¼ 23 632 65

and then pick out from the formula the corresponding terms,
here shown in bold:

       ð1 þ 2 þ 22 þ 23 þ . . .Þ6ð1 þ 3 þ 32 þ 33 þ . . .Þ
       6ð1 þ 5 þ 52 þ 53 þ . . .Þ6 . . .

When you ‘expand’ the brackets, each possible product of prime
powers occurs exactly once.
                                     The Riemann Hypothesis // 217



    Unfortunately this makes no sense because the series diverge
to infinity, and so does the product. However, if we replace each
number n by a suitable power ns , and make s large enough,
everything converges. (The minus sign ensures that large values
of s lead to convergence, which is more convenient.) So we get
the formula

       ð1 þ 2s þ 22s þ 23s þ . . .Þ6ð1 þ 3s þ 32s þ 33s þ . . .Þ
       6ð1 þ 5s þ 52s þ 53s þ . . .Þ6 . . .
       ¼ 1 þ 2s þ 3s þ 4s þ 5s þ 6s þ 7s þ 8s þ . . .

(where I’ve written 1 instead of 1s because these are equal
anyway.) This formula makes perfectly good sense provided s is
real and greater than 1. It’s true because

       60–s ¼ 2–3s 63–2s 65–s

and similarly for any positive integer.
    In fact, the formula makes perfectly good sense if s = aþib is
complex and its real part a is greater than 1. The final series in
the formula is called the Riemann zeta function of s, denoted by
zðsÞ. Here z is the Greek letter zeta.
    In 1859 Georg Riemann wrote a brief, astonishingly inven-
tive paper showing that the analytic properties of the zeta
function reveal deep statistical features of primes, including
Gauss’s prime number theorem. In fact, he could do more: he
could make the error in the approximation of pðxÞ much smaller,
by adding further terms to Gauss’s expression. Infinitely many
such terms, themselves forming a convergent series, would make
the error disappear altogether. Riemann could write down an
exact expression for pðxÞ as an analytic series.
    For the record, here’s his formula:

       pðxÞ þ pðx1=2 Þ þ pðx1=3 Þ þ . . .
                  Z ?                                     X
                         2               1
       ¼ LiðxÞ þ         ðt  1Þt log t       t  log 2    Liðxr Þ
                    x                                    r

where r runs through the non-trivial zeros of the zeta function.
Strictly speaking, this formula is not quite correct when the left-
218 // The Riemann Hypothesis



hand side has discontinuities, but that can be fixed up. You can
get an even more complicated formula for pðxÞ itself by applying
the formula again with x replaced by x1=2 ; x1=3 , and so on.
    All very pretty, but there was one tiny snag. In order to prove
that his series is correct, Riemann needed to establish an
apparently straightforward property of the zeta function.
Unfortunately, he couldn’t find a proof.
    All complex analysts learn at their mother’s knee (the mother
here being Augustin-Louis Cauchy, who along with Gauss first
understood the point) that the best way to understand any
complex function is to work out where its zeros lie. That is: which
complex numbers s make zðsÞ ¼ 0? Well, it becomes the best way
after some nifty footwork; in the region where the series for zðsÞ
converges, there aren’t any zeros. However, there is another
formula which agrees with the series whenever it converges, but
also makes sense when it doesn’t. This formula lets us extend the
definition of zðsÞ so that it makes sense for all complex numbers
s. And this ‘analytic continuation’ of the zeta function does have
zeros. Infinitely many of them.
    Some of the zeros are obvious – once you see the formula
involved in the continuation process. These ‘trivial zeros’ are the
negative even integers 2; 4; 6, and so on. The other zeros
come in pairs a þ ib and a  ib, and all such zeros that Riemann
could find had a ¼ 12. The first three pairs, for instance, are
       1            1            1
       2 +14:13i;   2 +21:02i;   2 +25:01i

Evidence like this led Riemann to conjecture (‘hypothesise’) that
all non-trivial zeros of the zeta function must lie on the so-called
critical line 12 þ ib.
    If he could prove this statement – the famous Riemann
Hypothesis – then he could prove that Gauss’s approximate
formula for pðxÞ is correct. He could improve it to an exact –
though complicated – formula. Great vistas of number theory
would be wide open for development.
    But he couldn’t, and we still can’t.
    Eventually, the prime number theorem was proved, inde-
                                    The Riemann Hypothesis // 219



pendently, by Jacques Hadamard and Charles de la Vallée-
Poussin in 1896. They used complex analysis, but managed to
find a proof that avoided the Riemann Hypothesis. We now
know that the first ten trillion non-trivial zeros of the zeta
function lie on the critical line, thanks to Xavier Gourdon and
Patrick Demichel in 2004. You might think that ought to settle
the matter, but in this area of number theory ten trillion is
ridiculously small, and may be misleading.
    The Riemann Hypothesis is important for several reasons. If
true, it would tell us a lot about the statistical properties of
primes. In particular, Helge von Koch proved in 1901 that the
Riemann Hypothesis is true if and only if the estimate
                          pﬃﬃﬃ
        jpðxÞ  LiðxÞj < C x log x

for the error in Gauss’s formula holds for some constant C. Later,
Lowell Schoenfeld proved that we can take C ¼ 1=8p for all
x52;657. (Sorry, this area of mathematics does that kind of
thing.) The point here is that the error is small compared with x,
and it tells us how much the primes fluctuate away from their
more typical behaviour.
    Riemann’s exact formula, of course, would also follow from
the Riemann Hypothesis. So would a huge list of other
mathematical results – you can find some of them at
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riemann_hypothesis
    However, the main reason why the Riemann Hypothesis is
important – apart from ‘because it’s there’ – is that it has a lot of
far-reaching analogues and generalisations in algebraic number
theory. A few of the analogues have even been proved. There is a
feeling that if the Riemann Hypothesis can be proved in its
original form, then so can the generalisations. These ideas are
too technical to describe, but see mathworld.wolfram.com/
RiemannHypothesis.html
    I will tell you one deceptively simple statement that is
equivalent to the Riemann Hypothesis. Of itself, it looks
harmless and unimportant. Not so! Here’s how it goes. If n is a
220 // Anti-Atheism



whole number, then the sum of its divisors, including n itself, is
written as sðnÞ. (Here s is the lower-case Greek letter ‘sigma’.) So

       sð24Þ ¼ 1 þ 2 þ 3 þ 4 þ 6 þ 8 þ 12 þ 24 ¼ 60
       sð12Þ ¼ 1 þ 2 þ 3 þ 4 þ 6 þ 12 ¼ 28

and so on. In 2002 Jeffrey Lagarias proved that the Riemann
Hypothesis is equivalent to the inequality

       sðnÞ4eHn log Hn

for every n. Here Hn is the nth harmonic number, equal to
          1 1 1      1
       1 þ þ þ þ ...

...........................................
          2 3 4      n