The Game of Life
In the 1970s John Conway invented the Game of Life. Strange
black creatures scuttle across a grid of white tiles, changing
shape, growing, collapsing, freezing and dying. The best way to
play Life (as it’s commonly known) is to download suitable
software. There are several excellent free programs for Life on the
web, easily located by searching. A Java version, which is easy to
use and will give hours of pleasure, can be found at:
www.bitstorm.org/gameoflife/
    Life is played with black counters on a potentially infinite
grid of square cells. Each cell holds either one counter or none.
At each stage, or generation, the set of counters defines a
configuration. The initial configuration at generation 0 evolves at
successive stages according to a short list of rules. The rules are
illustrated in the diagrams below. The neighbours of a given cell
are the eight cells immediately adjacent to it, horizontally,
vertically or diagonally. All births and deaths occur simultan-
eously: what happens to each counter or empty cell in
generation nþ1 depends only on its neighbours in generation n.




                     An occupied cell and its eight neighbours.




                                             Rule 1: If a counter
                                             (black) has two or three
                                             neighbours (grey), it
                                             survives to the next
                                             generation – that is, it
                                             remains in the same
                                             cell.
224 // The Game of Life




                                          Rule 2: If a counter
                                          (black) has four or more
                                          neighbours (grey), it dies
                                          in the next generation –
                                          that is, it is removed.




                                           Rule 3: If a counter
                                           (black) has no
                                           neighbours, or just one
                                           (grey), it dies in the next
                                           generation.


                                           Rule 4: If an empty cell
                                           (centre) has exactly
                                           three neighbours
                                           (grey), it gives birth
                                           (black) in the next
                                           generation – that is, a
                                           counter is placed in that
                                           cell. The neighbours
                                           may live or die,
                                           depending on their
                                           neighbours.


    Starting from any given initial configuration, the rules are
applied repeatedly to produce the life history of its succeeding
generations. For example, here is the life history of a small
triangle built from four counters:
                                             The Game of Life // 225




       Life history of a configuration. Configurations 8 and 9 alternate
       periodically.

     Even this simple examples shows that the rules for Life can
generate complex structures from simpler ones. Here the
sequence of generations becomes periodic: at generation 10 the
configuration is the same as at generation 8, and thereafter
configurations 8 and 9 alternate, a sequence known as traffic
lights.
     One of the fascinations of Life is the astonishing variety of
life histories, and the absence of any obvious relation between the
initial configuration and what it turns into. The system of rules is
entirely deterministic – the entire infinite future of the system is
implicit in its initial state. But Life dramatically demonstrates the
226 // The Game of Life



difference between determinism and predictability. This is where
the name ‘Life’ comes from.
    From a mathematical point of view, it is natural to classify
Life configurations according to their long-term behaviour. For
example, configurations may:

(1) disappear completely (die)

(2) attain a steady state (stasis)

(3) repeat the same sequence over and over again (periodicity)

(4) repeat the same sequence over and over again but end up in a
new location

(5) behave chaotically

(6) exhibit computational behaviour (universal Turing
machine).

Among the common periodic configurations are the blinker and
traffic lights, with periods 3 and 8, respectively:




                                              Two periodic
                                              configurations.


    The outcome of a game of Life is extraordinarily sensitive to
the precise choice of the initial state. A difference of one cell can
totally change the state’s future. Moreover, simple initial
configurations can sometimes develop into very complicated
ones. This behaviour – to some extent ‘designed in’ by the choice
of update rules – motivates the game’s name.
                                             The Game of Life // 227




       The left-hand S-shaped configuration eventually settles down
       after 1,405 generations, by which time it has given birth to 2
       gliders, 24 blocks, 6 ponds, 4 loaves, 18 beehives and 8 blinkers.
       If you delete just one cell to give the right-hand configuration,
       everything dies completely after 61 generations.

   The prototype mobile state is the glider, which moves one cell
diagonally every four moves:




       Motion of a glider.

   Three spaceships (lightweight, middleweight, heavyweight)
repeat cycles that cause them to move horizontally, throwing off
sparks that vanish immediately. Longer spaceships do not work
on their own – they break apart in complicated ways – but they
can be supported by flotillas of accompanying smaller spaceships.




       Spaceships.

   One of the earliest mathematical questions about Life was
whether there can exist a finite initial configuration whose future
configurations are unbounded – that is, it will become as large as
we wish if we allow enough time to pass. This question was
answered in the affirmative by Bill Gosper’s invention of a glider
gun. The configuration shown below in black oscillates with
228 // Two-Horse Race



period 30, and repeatedly fires gliders (the first two are shown in
grey). The stream of gliders grows unboundedly.




       The glider gun, with two gliders it has spat out.

    It turns out that the Game of Life has configurations which
act like computers, able in principle to calculate anything that a
computer program can specify. For example, such a configura-
tion can compute p to as many decimal places as we want. In
practice, such computations run incredibly slowly, so don’t
throw away your PC just yet.
    In fact, even simpler ‘games’ of the same kind – known as
cellular automata (page 239) – living on a line of squares instead
of a two-dimensional array, can behave as universal computers.
This automaton, known as ‘rule 110’, was suggested by Stephen
Wolfram in the 1980s, and Matthew Cook proved its universality
in the 1990s. It illustrates, in a very dramatic way, how
astonishingly complex behaviour can be generated by very


...........................................
simple rules. See mathworld.wolfram.com/Rule110.html