The Kepler Problem
Mathematicians have learned that apparently simple questions
are often hard to answer, and apparently obvious facts may be
false, or may be true but extremely hard to prove. The Kepler
problem is a case in point: it took nearly three hundred years to
232 // The Kepler Problem



solve it, even though everyone knew the correct answer from the
start.
     It all began in 1611 when Johannes Kepler, a mathematician
and astrologer (yes, he cast horoscopes; lots of mathematicians
did at that time – it was a quick way to make money) wanted to
give his sponsor a New Year’s gift. The sponsor rejoiced in the
name Johannes Mathäus Wacker of Wackenfels, and Kepler
wanted to say ‘thanks for all the cash’ without actually spending
any of it. So he wrote a book, and presented it to his sponsor. Its
title (in Latin) was The Six-Cornered Snowflake. Kepler started with
the curious shapes of snowflakes, which often form beautiful
sixfold symmetric crystals, and asked why this happened.




                                                A typical ‘dendritic’
                                                snowflake.


    It is often said that ‘no two snowflakes are alike’. The logician
in me objects ‘How can you tell?’ but a back-of-the-envelope
calculation suggests that there are so many features in a
‘dendritic’ snowflake, of the kind illustrated, that the chance of
two being identical is pretty much zero.
    No matter. What matters here is that Kepler’s analysis of the
snowflake led him to the idea that its sixfold symmetry arises
because that’s the most efficient way to pack circles in a plane.
    Take a lot of coins, of the same denomination – pennies, say.
If you lay them on a table and push them together tightly, you
                                         The Kepler Problem // 233



quickly discover that they fit perfectly into a honeycomb
pattern, or ‘hexagonal lattice’:


                                             (Left) The closest way to
                                             pack circles, and (right)
                                             a less efficient lattice
                                             packing.

    And this is the closest packing – the one that fills space most
efficiently, in the ideal case of infinitely many circles arranged on
a plane. Alternatives, such as the square lattice on the right, are
less efficient.
    Mind you, this innocent assertion wasn’t proved until 1940,
when László Fejes Tóth managed it. (Axel Thue sketched out a
proof in 1892, and gave more details in 1910, but he left some
gaps.) Tóth’s proof was quite hard. Why the difficulty? We don’t
know, to begin with, that the most efficient packing forms a
regular lattice. Maybe something more random could work
better. (For finite packings, say inside a square, this can actually
happen – see the next puzzle, about a milk crate.)
    Along the way, Kepler came very close indeed to the idea that
all matter is made from tiny indivisible components, which we
now call ‘atoms’. This is impressive, given that he did no
experiments in the course of writing his book. Atomic theory,
introduced by the Greek Democritus, was not established
experimentally until about 1900.
    Kepler had his eye on something a bit more complicated,
though: the closest way to pack identical spheres in space. He
was aware of three regular ‘lattice’ packings, which we now call
the hexagonal, cubic and face-centred cubic lattices. The first of
these is formed by stacking lots of honeycomb layers of spheres
on top of one another, with the centres of corresponding spheres
forming a vertical line. The second is made from square-lattice
layers, also stacked vertically. For the third, we stack hexagonal
layers, but fit the spheres in any given layer into the hollows in
the one below.
234 // The Kepler Problem



    You can get the same result, though tilted, by similarly
stacking square-lattice layers so that the spheres in any given
layer fit into the hollows in the one below – this isn’t entirely
obvious, and – like the milk crate puzzle – it shows that intuition
may not be a good guide in this area. The picture shows how this
happens: the horizontal layers are square, but the slanting layers
are hexagonal.


                                      Part of a face-centred
                                      cubic lattice.




    Now, every greengrocer knows that the way to stack oranges
is to use the face-centred cubic lattice.* By thinking about
pomegranate seeds, Kepler was led to the casual remark that with
the face-centred cubic lattice, ‘the packing will be the tightest
possible’.
    That was in 1611. The proof that Kepler was right had to wait
until 1998, when Thomas Hales announced that he had achieved
this with massive computer assistance. Basically, Hales consid-
ered all possible ways to surround a sphere with other spheres,
and showed that if the arrangement wasn’t the one found in the
face-centred cubic lattice, then the spheres could be shoved
closer together. Tóth’s proof in the plane used the same ideas,
but he only had to check about forty cases.
    Hales had to check thousands, so he rephrased the problem
in terms that could be verified by a computer. This led to a huge
computation – but each step in it is essentially trivial. Almost all
of the proof has been checked independently, but a very tiny
level of doubt still remains. So Hales has started a new computer-

*   They don’t say it that way, but they stack it that way.
                                    The Milk Crate Problem // 235



based project to devise a proof that can be verified by standard
proof-checking software. Even then, a computer will be involved
in the verifications, but the software concerned does such simple
things – in principle – that a human can check that the software
does what it is supposed to. The project will probably take 20
years. You can still object on philosophical grounds if you wish,
but you’ll be splitting logical hairs very finely indeed.
    What makes the problem so hard? Greengrocers usually start
with a square box that has a flat base, so they naturally pack their
oranges in layers, making each layer a square lattice. It is then
natural to make the second layer fill the gaps in the bottom one,
and so on. If by chance they start with a hexagonal layer instead,
they get the same packing anyway, except for a tilt. Gauss proved
in 1831 that Kepler’s packing is the tightest lattice packing. But
the mathematical problem here is to prove this, without
assuming at the start that the packing forms flat layers. The
mathematician’s spheres can hover unsupported in space. So the
greengrocer’s ‘solution’ involves a whole pile of assumptions –
well, actually, oranges. Since experiments aren’t proofs, and here
even the experiment is dodgy, you can see that the problem


...........................................
could be harder than it seems.