Tautoverbs
In Terry Pratchett’s Discworld series of fantasy novels, the
members of the Order of Wen the Eternally Surprised, better
known as the History Monks, are greatly impressed by the
homespun wisdom of Mrs Marietta Cosmopilite. They have
never before heard her homely homilies (such as ‘I haven’t got
all day, you know’), so to those monks who follow the Way of
Mrs Cosmopilite, her simple assertions are marvellous new
philosophical insights.
    Mathematicians take a more jaundiced view of folk wisdom,
and habitually revise proverbs to make them more logical.
Indeed tautological – trivially true. Thus the proverb ‘Penny wise,
pound foolish’ becomes the tautoverb ‘Penny wise, wise about
238 // Tautoverbs



pennies,’ which makes more sense and is difficult to dispute. And
‘Look after the pennies and the pounds will look after
themselves’ is more convincing in the form ‘Look after the
pennies and the pennies will be looked after.’
     As a kid I was always vaguely bothered that in their original
form these two proverbs contradict each other, though I now see
this as the default mechanism whereby folk wisdom ensures that
it is perceived to be wise. The revised versions do not conflict –
clear evidence of their superiority. I’ll give you a couple of other
examples to get you started, and then turn you lose on the
opening words of several proverbs. Your job is to complete them
to make tautoverbs. The first example is simple and direct, the
other more baroque. Both forms are permissible. So is helpful
commentary, preferably blindingly obvious. Logical quibbles are
actively encouraged – the more pedantic, the better.

. He who fights and runs away will live to run away again.
. A bird in the bush is worth two in the hand, because free-
    range produce is always expensive.

OK, now it’s your turn. In the same spirit, complete the
following tautoverbs:

.   No news is—
.   The bigger they are—
.   Nothing ventured—
.   Too many cooks—
.   You cannot have your cake—
.   A watched pot—
.   If pigs had wings—

If you have enjoyed this game, psychiatric help is recommended,
but until it arrives you can find a lot more proverbs to work on at
www.manythings.org/proverbs/index.html


...........................................
    Answers on page 306
                                          Complexity Science // 239